
There was a spatter of pebbles against the window and the youngster
stirred in his sleep. Another, and he was awake.

He sat up stiffly in bed. Seconds passed while he interpreted his
strange surroundings. He wasn't in his own home, of course. This was out
in the country. It was colder than it should be and there was green at
the window.

"Slim!"

The call was a hoarse, urgent whisper, and the youngster bounded to the
open window.

Slim wasn't his real name, but the new friend he had met the day before
had needed only one look at his slight figure to say, "You're Slim." He
added, "I'm Red."

Red wasn't his real name, either, but its appropriateness was obvious.
They were friends instantly with the quick unquestioning friendship of
young ones not yet quite in adolescence, before even the first stains of
adulthood began to make their appearance.

Slim cried, "Hi, Red!" and waved cheerfully, still blinking the sleep
out of himself.

Red kept to his croaking whisper, "Quiet! You want to wake somebody?"

Slim noticed all at once that the sun scarcely topped the low hills in
the east, that the shadows were long and soft, and that the grass was
wet.

Slim said, more softly, "What's the matter?"

Red only waved for him to come out.

Slim dressed quickly, gladly confining his morning wash to the momentary
sprinkle of a little lukewarm water. He let the air dry the exposed
portions of his body as he ran out, while bare skin grew wet against the
dewy grass.

Red said, "You've got to be quiet. If Mom wakes up or Dad or your Dad or
even any of the hands then it'll be 'Come on in or you'll catch your
death of cold.'"

He mimicked voice and tone faithfully, so that Slim laughed and thought
that there had never been so funny a fellow as Red.

Slim said, eagerly, "Do you come out here every day like this, Red? Real
early? It's like the whole world is just yours, isn't it, Red? No one
else around and all like that." He felt proud at being allowed entrance
into this private world.

Red stared at him sidelong. He said carelessly, "I've been up for hours.
Didn't you hear it last night?"

"Hear what?"

"Thunder."

"Was there a thunderstorm?" Slim never slept through a thunderstorm.

"I guess not. But there was thunder. I heard it, and then I went to the
window and it wasn't raining. It was all stars and the sky was just
getting sort of almost gray. You know what I mean?"

Slim had never seen it so, but he nodded.

"So I just thought I'd go out," said Red.

They walked along the grassy side of the concrete road that split the
panorama right down the middle all the way down to where it vanished
among the hills. It was so old that Red's father couldn't tell Red when
it had been built. It didn't have a crack or a rough spot in it.

Red said, "Can you keep a secret?"

"Sure, Red. What kind of a secret?"

"Just a secret. Maybe I'll tell you and maybe I won't. I don't know
yet." Red broke a long, supple stem from a fern they passed,
methodically stripped it of its leaflets and swung what was left
whip-fashion. For a moment, he was on a wild charger, which reared and
champed under his iron control. Then he got tired, tossed the whip aside
and stowed the charger away in a corner of his imagination for future
use.

He said, "There'll be a circus around."

Slim said, "That's no secret. I knew that. My Dad told me even before we
came here--"

"That's not the secret. Fine secret! Ever see a circus?"

"Oh, sure. You bet."

"Like it?"

"Say, there isn't anything I like better."

Red was watching out of the corner of his eyes again. "Ever think you
would like to be with a circus? I mean, for good?"

Slim considered, "I guess not. I think I'll be an astronomer like my
Dad. I think he wants me to be."

"Huh! Astronomer!" said Red.

Slim felt the doors of the new, private world closing on him and
astronomy became a thing of dead stars and black, empty space.

He said, placatingly, "A circus _would_ be more fun."

"You're just saying that."

"No, I'm not. I mean it."

Red grew argumentative. "Suppose you had a chance to join the circus
right now. What would you do?"

"I--I--"

"See!" Red affected scornful laughter.

Slim was stung. "I'd join up."

"Go on."

"Try me."

Red whirled at him, strange and intense. "You meant that? You want to go
in with me?"

[Illustration]

"What do you mean?" Slim stepped back a bit, surprised by the unexpected
challenge.

"I got something that can get us into the circus. Maybe someday we can
even have a circus of our own. We could be the biggest circus-fellows in
the world. That's if you want to go in with me. Otherwise--Well, I guess
I can do it on my own. I just thought: Let's give good old Slim a
chance."

The world was strange and glamorous, and Slim said, "Sure thing, Red.
I'm in! What is it, huh, Red? Tell me what it is."

"Figure it out. What's the most important thing in circuses?"

Slim thought desperately. He wanted to give the right answer. Finally,
he said, "Acrobats?"

"Holy Smokes! I wouldn't go five steps to look at acrobats."

"I don't know then."

"Animals, that's what! What's the best side-show? Where are the biggest
crowds? Even in the main rings the best acts are animal acts." There was
no doubt in Red's voice.

"Do you think so?"

"Everyone thinks so. You ask anyone. Anyway, I found animals this
morning. Two of them."

"And you've got them?"

"Sure. That's the secret. Are you telling?"

"Of course not."

"Okay. I've got them in the barn. Do you want to see them?"

They were almost at the barn; its huge open door black. Too black. They
had been heading there all the time. Slim stopped in his tracks.

He tried to make his words casual. "Are they big?"

"Would I fool with them if they were big? They can't hurt you. They're
only about so long. I've got them in a cage."

They were in the barn now and Slim saw the large cage suspended from a
hook in the roof. It was covered with stiff canvas.

Red said, "We used to have some bird there or something. Anyway, they
can't get away from there. Come on, let's go up to the loft."

They clambered up the wooden stairs and Red hooked the cage toward them.

Slim pointed and said, "There's sort of a hole in the canvas."

Red frowned. "How'd that get there?" He lifted the canvas, looked in,
and said, with relief, "They're still there."

"The canvas appeared to be burned," worried Slim.

"You want to look, or don't you?"

Slim nodded slowly. He wasn't sure he wanted to, after all. They might
be--

But the canvas had been jerked off and there they were. Two of them, the
way Red said. They were small, and sort of disgusting-looking. The
animals moved quickly as the canvas lifted and were on the side toward
the youngsters. Red poked a cautious finger at them.

"Watch out," said Slim, in agony.

"They don't hurt you," said Red. "Ever see anything like them?"

"No."

"Can't you see how a circus would jump at a chance to have these?"

"Maybe they're too small for a circus."

Red looked annoyed. He let go the cage which swung back and forth
pendulum-fashion. "You're just trying to back out, aren't you?"

"No, I'm not. It's just--"

"They're not too small, don't worry. Right now, I've only got one
worry."

"What's that?"

"Well, I've got to keep them till the circus comes, don't I? I've got
to figure out what to feed them meanwhile."

The cage swung and the little trapped creatures clung to its bars,
gesturing at the youngsters with queer, quick motions--almost as though
they were intelligent.


II

The Astronomer entered the dining room with decorum. He felt very much
the guest.

He said, "Where are the youngsters? My son isn't in his room."

The Industrialist smiled. "They've been out for hours. However,
breakfast was forced into them among the women some time ago, so there
is nothing to worry about. Youth, Doctor, youth!"

"Youth!" The word seemed to depress the Astronomer.

They ate breakfast in silence. The Industrialist said once, "You really
think they'll come. The day looks so--_normal_."

The Astronomer said, "They'll come."

That was all.

Afterward the Industrialist said, "You'll pardon me. I can't conceive
your playing so elaborate a hoax. You really spoke to them?"

"As I speak to you. At least, in a sense. They can project thoughts."

"I gathered that must be so from your letter. How, I wonder."

"I could not say. I asked them and, of course, they were vague. Or
perhaps it was just that I could not understand. It involves a projector
for the focussing of thought and, even more than that, conscious
attention on the part of both projector and receptor. It was quite a
while before I realized they were trying to think at me. Such
thought-projectors may be part of the science they will give us."

"Perhaps," said the Industrialist. "Yet think of the changes it would
bring to society. A thought-projector!"

"Why not? Change would be good for us."

"I don't think so."

"It is only in old age that change is unwelcome," said the Astronomer,
"and races can be old as well as individuals."

The Industrialist pointed out the window. "You see that road. It was
built Beforethewars. I don't know exactly when. It is as good now as the
day it was built. We couldn't possibly duplicate it now. The race was
young when that was built, eh?"

"Then? Yes! At least they weren't afraid of new things."

"No. I wish they had been. Where is the society of Beforethewars?
Destroyed, Doctor! What good were youth and new things? We are better
off now. The world is peaceful and jogs along. The race goes nowhere but
after all, there is nowhere to go. _They_ proved that. The men who built
the road. I will speak with your visitors as I agreed, if they come. But
I think I will only ask them to go."

"The race is not going nowhere," said the Astronomer, earnestly. "It is
going toward final destruction. My university has a smaller student body
each year. Fewer books are written. Less work is done. An old man sleeps
in the sun and his days are peaceful and unchanging, but each day finds
him nearer death all the same."

"Well, well," said the Industrialist.

"No, don't dismiss it. Listen. Before I wrote you, I investigated your
position in the planetary economy."

"And you found me solvent?" interrupted the Industrialist, smiling.

"Why, yes. Oh, I see, you are joking. And yet--perhaps the joke is not
far off. You are less solvent than your father and he was less solvent
than his father. Perhaps your son will no longer be solvent. It becomes
too troublesome for the planet to support even the industries that still
exist, though they are toothpicks to the oak trees of Beforethewars. We
will be back to village economy and then to what? The caves?"

"And the infusion of fresh technological knowledge will be the changing
of all that?"

"Not just the new knowledge. Rather the whole effect of change, of a
broadening of horizons. Look, sir, I chose you to approach in this
matter not only because you were rich and influential with government
officials, but because you had an unusual reputation, for these days, of
daring to break with tradition. Our people will resist change and you
would know how to handle them, how to see to it that--that--"

"That the youth of the race is revived?"

"Yes."

"With its atomic bombs?"

"The atomic bombs," returned the Astronomer, "need not be the end of
civilization. These visitors of mine had their atomic bomb, or whatever
their equivalent was on their own worlds, and survived it, because they
didn't give up. Don't you see? It wasn't the bomb that defeated us, but
our own shell shock. This may be the last chance to reverse the
process."

[Illustration]

"Tell me," said the Industrialist, "what do these friends from space
want in return?"

The Astronomer hesitated. He said, "I will be truthful with you. They
come from a denser planet. Ours is richer in the lighter atoms."

"They want magnesium? Aluminum?"

"No, sir. Carbon and hydrogen. They want coal and oil."

"Really?"

The Astronomer said, quickly, "You are going to ask why creatures who
have mastered space travel, and therefore atomic power, would want coal
and oil. I can't answer that."

The Industrialist smiled. "But I can. This is the best evidence yet of
the truth of your story. Superficially, atomic power would seem to
preclude the use of coal and oil. However, quite apart from the energy
gained by their combustion they remain, and always will remain, the
basic raw material for all organic chemistry. Plastics, dyes,
pharmaceuticals, solvents. Industry could not exist without them, even
in an atomic age. Still, if coal and oil are the low price for which
they would sell us the troubles and tortures of racial youth, my answer
is that the commodity would be dear if offered gratis."

The Astronomer sighed and said, "There are the boys!"

They were visible through the open window, standing together in the
grassy field and lost in animated conversation. The Industrialist's son
pointed imperiously and the Astronomer's son nodded and made off at a
run toward the house.

The Industrialist said, "There is the Youth you speak of. Our race has
as much of it as it ever had."

"Yes, but we age them quickly and pour them into the mold."

Slim scuttled into the room, the door banging behind him.

The Astronomer said, in mild disapproval, "What's this?"

Slim looked up in surprise and came to a halt. "I beg your pardon. I
didn't know anyone was here. I am sorry to have interrupted." His
enunciation was almost painfully precise.

The Industrialist said, "It's all right, youngster."

But the Astronomer said, "Even if you had been entering an empty room,
son, there would be no cause for slamming a door."

"Nonsense," insisted the Industrialist. "The youngster has done no harm.
You simply scold him for being young. You, with your views!"

He said to Slim, "Come here, lad."

Slim advanced slowly.

"How do you like the country, eh?"

"Very much, sir, thank you."

"My son has been showing you about the place, has he?"

"Yes, sir. Red--I mean--"

"No, no. Call him Red. I call him that myself. Now tell me, what are you
two up to, eh?"

Slim looked away. "Why--just exploring, sir."

The Industrialist turned to the Astronomer. "There you are, youthful
curiosity and adventure-lust. The race has not yet lost it."

Slim said, "Sir?"

"Yes, lad."

The youngster took a long time in getting on with it. He said, "Red sent
me in for something good to eat, but I don't exactly know what he meant.
I didn't like to say so."

"Why, just ask cook. She'll have something good for young'uns to eat."

"Oh, no, sir. I mean for animals."

"For animals?"

"Yes, sir. What do animals eat?"

The Astronomer said, "I am afraid my son is city-bred."

"Well," said the Industrialist, "there's no harm in that. What kind of
an animal, lad?"

"A small one, sir."

"Then try grass or leaves, and if they don't want that, nuts or berries
would probably do the trick."

"Thank you, sir." Slim ran out again, closing the door gently behind
him.

The Astronomer said, "Do you suppose they've trapped an animal alive?"
He was obviously perturbed.

"That's common enough. There's no shooting on my estate and it's tame
country, full of rodents and small creatures. Red is always coming home
with pets of one sort or another. They rarely maintain his interest for
long."

He looked at the wall clock. "Your friends should have been here by now,
shouldn't they?"


III

The swaying had come to a halt and it was dark. The Explorer was not
comfortable in the alien air. It felt as thick as soup and he had to
breathe shallowly. Even so--

He reached out in a sudden need for company. The Merchant was warm to
the touch. His breathing was rough, he moved in an occasional spasm, and
was obviously asleep. The Explorer hesitated and decided not to wake
him. It would serve no real purpose.

There would be no rescue, of course. That was the penalty paid for the
high profits which unrestrained competition could lead to. The Merchant
who opened a new planet could have a ten year monopoly of its trade,
which he might hug to himself or, more likely, rent out to all comers at
a stiff price. It followed that planets were searched for in secrecy
and, preferably, away from the usual trade routes. In a case such as
theirs, then, there was little or no chance that another ship would come
within range of their subetherics except for the most improbable of
coincidences. Even if they were in their ship, that is, rather than in
this--this--_cage_.

The Explorer grasped the thick bars. Even if they blasted those away, as
they could, they would be stuck too high in open air for leaping.

It was too bad. They had landed twice before in the scout-ship. They had
established contact with the natives who were grotesquely huge, but mild
and unaggressive. It was obvious that they had once owned a flourishing
technology, but hadn't faced up to the consequences of such a
technology. It would have been a wonderful market.

And it was a tremendous world. The Merchant, especially, had been taken
aback. He had known the figures that expressed the planet's diameter,
but from a distance of two light-seconds, he had stood at the visi-plate
and muttered, "Unbelievable!"

"Oh, there are larger worlds," the Explorer said. It wouldn't do for an
Explorer to be too easily impressed.

"Inhabited?"

"Well, no."

"Why, you could drop your planet into that large ocean and drown it."

The Explorer smiled. It was a gentle dig at his Arcturian homeland,
which was smaller than most planets. He said, "Not quite."

The Merchant followed along the line of his thoughts. "And the
inhabitants are large in proportion to their world?" He sounded as
though the news struck him less favorably now.

"Nearly ten times our height."

"Are you sure they are friendly?"

"That is hard to say. Friendship between alien intelligences is an
imponderable. They are not dangerous, I think. We've come across other
groups that could not maintain equilibrium after the atomic war stage
and you know the results. Introversion. Retreat. Gradual decadence and
increasing gentleness."

"Even if they are such monsters?"

"The principle remains."

It was about then that the Explorer felt the heavy throbbing of the
engines.

He frowned and said, "We are descending a bit too quickly."

There had been some speculation on the dangers of landing some hours
before. The planetary target was a huge one for an oxygen-water world.
Though it lacked the size of the uninhabitable hydrogen-ammonia planets
and its low density made its surface gravity fairly normal, its
gravitational forces fell off but slowly with distance. In short, its
gravitational potential was high and the ship's Calculator was a
run-of-the-mill model not designed to plot landing trajectories at that
potential range. That meant the Pilot would have to use manual controls.

It would have been wiser to install a more high-powered model, but that
would have meant a trip to some outpost of civilization; lost time;
perhaps a lost secret. The Merchant demanded an immediate landing.

The Merchant felt it necessary to defend his position now. He said
angrily to the Explorer, "Don't you think the Pilot knows his job? He
landed you safely twice before."

Yes, thought the Explorer, in a scout-ship, not in this unmaneuverable
freighter. Aloud, he said nothing.

He kept his eye on the visi-plate. They were descending too quickly.
There was no room for doubt. Much too quickly.

The Merchant said, peevishly, "Why do you keep silence?"

"Well, then, if you wish me to speak, I would suggest that you strap on
your Floater and help me prepare the Ejector."

The Pilot fought a noble fight. He was no beginner. The atmosphere,
abnormally high and thick in the gravitational potential of this world
whipped and burned about the ship, but to the very last it looked as
though he might bring it under control despite that.

He even maintained course, following the extrapolated line to the point
on the northern continent toward which they were headed. Under other
circumstances, with a shade more luck, the story would eventually have
been told and retold as a heroic and masterly reversal of a lost
situation. But within sight of victory, tired body and tired nerves
clamped a control bar with a shade too much pressure. The ship, which
had almost levelled off, dipped down again.

There was no room to retrieve the final error. There was only a mile
left to fall. The Pilot remained at his post to the actual landing, his
only thought that of breaking the force of the crash, of maintaining the
spaceworthiness of the vessel. He did not survive. With the ship bucking
madly in a soupy atmosphere, few Ejectors could be mobilized and only
one of them in time.

When afterwards, the Explorer lifted out of unconsciousness and rose
to his feet, he had the definite feeling that but for himself and
the Merchant, there were no survivors. And perhaps that was an
over-calculation. His Floater had burnt out while still sufficiently
distant from surface to have the fall stun him. The Merchant might have
had less luck, even, than that.

He was surrounded by a world of thick, ropy stalks of grass, and in the
distance were trees that reminded him vaguely of similar structures on
his native Arcturian world except that their lowest branches were high
above what he would consider normal tree-tops.

He called, his voice sounding basso in the thick air and the Merchant
answered. The Explorer made his way toward him, thrusting violently at
the coarse stalks that barred his path.

"Are you hurt?" he asked.

The Merchant grimaced. "I've sprained something. It hurts to walk."

The Explorer probed gently. "I don't think anything is broken. You'll
have to walk despite the pain."

"Can't we rest first?"

"It's important to try to find the ship. If it is spaceworthy or if it
can be repaired, we may live. Otherwise, we won't."

"Just a few minutes. Let me catch my breath."

The Explorer was glad enough for those few minutes. The Merchant's eyes
were already closed. He allowed his to do the same.

He heard the trampling and his eyes snapped open. Never sleep on a
strange planet, he told himself futilely.

The Merchant was awake too and his steady screaming was a rumble of
terror.

The Explorer called, "It's only a native of this planet. It won't harm
you."

But even as he spoke, the giant had swooped down and in a moment they
were in its grasp being lifted closer to its monstrous ugliness.

The Merchant struggled violently and, of course, quite futilely. "Can't
you talk to it?" he yelled.

The Explorer could only shake his head. "I can't reach it with the
Projector. It won't be listening."

"Then blast it. Blast it down."

"We can't do that." The phrase "you fool" had almost been added. The
Explorer struggled to keep his self-control. They were swallowing space
as the monster moved purposefully away.

"Why not?" cried the Merchant. "You can reach your blaster. I see it in
plain sight. Don't be afraid of falling."

"It's simpler than that. If this monster is killed, you'll never trade
with this planet. You'll never even leave it. You probably won't live
the day out."

"Why? Why?"

"Because this is one of the young of the species. You should know what
happens when a trader kills a native young, even accidentally. What's
more, if this is the target-point, then we are on the estate of a
powerful native. This might be one of his brood."

That was how they entered their present prison. They had carefully burnt
away a portion of the thick, stiff covering and it was obvious that the
height from which they were suspended was a killing one.

Now, once again, the prison-cage shuddered and lifted in an upward arc.
The Merchant rolled to the lower rim and startled awake. The cover
lifted and light flooded in. As was the case the time before, there were
two specimens of the young. They were not very different in appearance
from adults of the species, reflected the Explorer, though, of course,
they were considerably smaller.

A handful of reedy green stalks was stuffed between the bars. Its odor
was not unpleasant but it carried clods of soil at its ends.

The Merchant drew away and said, huskily, "What are they doing?"

The Explorer said, "Trying to feed us, I should judge. At least this
seems to be the native equivalent of grass."

The cover was replaced and they were set swinging again, alone with
their fodder.


IV

Slim started at the sound of footsteps and brightened when it turned out
to be only Red.

He said, "No one's around. I had my eye peeled, you bet."

Red said, "Ssh. Look. You take this stuff and stick it in the cage. I've
got to scoot back to the house."

"What is it?" Slim reached reluctantly.

"Ground meat. Holy Smokes, haven't you ever seen ground meat? That's
what you should've got when I sent you to the house instead of coming
back with that stupid grass."

Slim was hurt. "How'd I know they don't eat grass. Besides, ground meat
doesn't come loose like that. It comes in cellophane and it isn't that
color."

"Sure--in the city. Out here we grind our own and it's always this color
till it's cooked."

"You mean it isn't cooked?" Slim drew away quickly.

Red looked disgusted. "Do you think animals eat _cooked_ food. Come on,
take it. It won't hurt you. I tell you there isn't much time."

"Why? What's doing back at the house?"

"I don't know. Dad and your father are walking around. I think maybe
they're looking for me. Maybe the cook told them I took the meat.
Anyway, we don't want them coming here after me."

"Didn't you ask the cook before you took this stuff?"

"Who? That crab? Shouldn't wonder if she only let me have a drink of
water because Dad makes her. Come on. Take it."

Slim took the large glob of meat though his skin crawled at the touch.
He turned toward the barn and Red sped away in the direction from which
he had come.

He slowed when he approached the two adults, took a few deep breaths to
bring himself back to normal, and then carefully and nonchalantly
sauntered past. (They were walking in the general direction of the barn,
he noticed, but not dead on.)

He said, "Hi, Dad. Hello, sir."

The Industrialist said, "Just a moment, Red. I have a question to ask
you?"

Red turned a carefully blank face to his father. "Yes, Dad?"

"Mother tells me you were out early this morning."

"Not real early, Dad. Just a little before breakfast."

"She said you told her it was because you had been awakened during the
night and didn't go back to sleep."

Red waited before answering. Should he have told Mom that?

Then he said, "Yes, sir."

"What was it that awakened you?"

Red saw no harm in it. He said, "I don't know, Dad. It sounded like
thunder, sort of, and like a collision, sort of."

"Could you tell where it came from?"

"It _sounded_ like it was out by the hill." That was truthful, and
useful as well, since the direction was almost opposite that in which
the barn lay.

The Industrialist looked at his guest. "I suppose it would do no harm to
walk toward the hill."

The Astronomer said, "I am ready."

Red watched them walk away and when he turned he saw Slim peering
cautiously out from among the briars of a hedge.

Red waved at him. "Come on."

Slim stepped out and approached. "Did they say anything about the meat?"

"No. I guess they don't know about that. They went down to the hill."

"What for?"

"Search me. They kept asking about the noise I heard. Listen, did the
animals eat the meat?"

"Well," said Slim, cautiously, "they were sort of _looking_ at it and
smelling it or something."

"Okay," Red said, "I guess they'll eat it. Holy Smokes, they've got to
eat _something_. Let's walk along toward the hill and see what Dad and
your father are going to do."

"What about the animals?"

"They'll be all right. A fellow can't spend all his time on them. Did
you give them water?"

"Sure. They drank that."

"See. Come on. We'll look at them after lunch. I tell you what. We'll
bring them fruit. Anything'll eat fruit."

Together they trotted up the rise, Red, as usual, in the lead.


V

The Astronomer said, "You think the noise was their ship landing?"

"Don't you think it could be?"

"If it were, they may all be dead."

"Perhaps not." The Industrialist frowned.

"If they have landed, and are still alive, where are they?"

"Think about that for a while." He was still frowning.

The Astronomer said, "I don't understand you."

"They may not be friendly."

"Oh, no. I've spoken with them. They've--"

"You've spoken with them. Call that reconnaissance. What would their
next step be? Invasion?"

"But they only have one ship, sir."

"You know that only because they say so. They might have a fleet."

"I've told you about their size. They--"

"Their size would not matter, if they have handweapons that may well be
superior to our artillery."

"That is not what I meant."

"I had this partly in mind from the first." The Industrialist went on.
"It is for that reason I agreed to see them after I received your
letter. Not to agree to an unsettling and impossible trade, but to judge
their real purposes. I did not count on their evading the meeting."

He sighed. "I suppose it isn't our fault. You are right in one thing, at
any rate. The world has been at peace too long. We are losing a healthy
sense of suspicion."

The Astronomer's mild voice rose to an unusual pitch and he said, "I
_will_ speak. I tell you that there is no reason to suppose they can
possibly be hostile. They are small, yes, but that is only important
because it is a reflection of the fact that their native worlds are
small. Our world has what is for them a normal gravity, but because of
our much higher gravitational potential, our atmosphere is too dense to
support them comfortably over sustained periods. For a similar reason
the use of the world as a base for interstellar travel, except for trade
in certain items, is uneconomical. And there are important differences
in chemistry of life due to the basic differences in soils. They
couldn't eat our food or we theirs."

"Surely all this can be overcome. They can bring their own food, build
domed stations of lowered air pressure, devise specially designed
ships."

"They can. And how glibly you can describe feats that are easy to a race
in its youth. It is simply that they don't have to do any of that. There
are millions of worlds suitable for them in the Galaxy. They don't need
this one which isn't."

"How do you know? All this is their information again."

"This I was able to check independently. I am an astronomer, after all."

"That is true. Let me hear what you have to say then, while we walk."

"Then, sir, consider that for a long time our astronomers have believed
that two general classes of planetary bodies existed. First, the planets
which formed at distances far enough from their stellar nucleus to
become cool enough to capture hydrogen. These would be large planets
rich in hydrogen, ammonia and methane. We have examples of these in the
giant outer planets. The second class would include those planets formed
so near the stellar center that the high temperature would make it
impossible to capture much hydrogen. These would be smaller planets,
comparatively poorer in hydrogen and richer in oxygen. We know that type
very well since we live on one. Ours is the only solar system we know in
detail, however, and it has been reasonable for us to assume that these
were the _only_ two planetary classes."

"I take it then that there is another."

"Yes. There is a super-dense class, still smaller, poorer in hydrogen,
than the inner planets of the solar system. The ratio of occurrence of
hydrogen-ammonia planets and these super-dense water-oxygen worlds of
theirs over the entire Galaxy--and remember that they have actually
conducted a survey of significant sample volumes of the Galaxy which we,
without interstellar travel, cannot do--is about 3 to 1. This leaves
them seven million super-dense worlds for exploration and colonization."

The Industrialist looked at the blue sky and the green-covered trees
among which they were making their way. He said, "And worlds like ours?"

The Astronomer said, softly, "Ours is the first solar system they have
found which contains them. Apparently the development of our solar
system was unique and did not follow the ordinary rules."

The Industrialist considered that. "What it amounts to is that these
creatures from space are asteroid-dwellers."

"No, no. The asteroids are something else again. They occur, I was told,
in one out of eight stellar systems, but they're completely different
from what we've been discussing."

"And how does your being an astronomer change the fact that you are
still only quoting their unsupported statements?"

"But they did not restrict themselves to bald items of information. They
presented me with a theory of stellar evolution which I had to accept
and which is more nearly valid than anything our own astronomy has ever
been able to devise, if we except possible lost theories dating from
Beforethewars. Mind you, their theory had a rigidly mathematical
development and it predicted just such a Galaxy as they describe. So you
see, they have all the worlds they wish. They are not land-hungry.
Certainly not for our land."

"Reason would say so, if what you say is true. But creatures may be
intelligent and not reasonable. Our forefathers were presumably
intelligent, yet they were certainly not reasonable. Was it reasonable
to destroy almost all their tremendous civilization in atomic warfare
over causes our historians can no longer accurately determine?" The
Industrialist brooded over it. "From the dropping of the first atom bomb
over those islands--I forget the ancient name--there was only one end in
sight, and in plain sight. Yet events were allowed to proceed to that
end."

He looked up, said briskly, "Well, where are we? I wonder if we are not
on a fool's errand after all."

But the Astronomer was a little in advance and his voice came thickly.
"No fool's errand, sir. Look there."


VI

Red and Slim had trailed their elders with the experience of youth,
aided by the absorption and anxiety of their fathers. Their view of the
final object of the search was somewhat obscured by the underbrush
behind which they remained.

Red said, "Holy Smokes. Look at that. It's all shiny silver or
something."

But it was Slim who was really excited. He caught at the other. "I know
what this is. It's a space-ship. That must be why my father came here.
He's one of the biggest astronomers in the world and your father would
have to call him if a space-ship landed on his estate."

"What are you talking about? Dad didn't even know that thing was there.
He only came here because I told him I heard the thunder from here.
Besides, there isn't any such thing as a space-ship."

"Sure, there is. Look at it. See those round things. They are ports. And
you can see the rocket tubes."

"How do you know so much?"

Slim was flushed. He said, "I read about them. My father has books about
them. Old books. From Beforethewars."

"Huh. Now I know you're making it up. Books from Beforethewars!"

"My father _has_ to have them. He teaches at the University. It's his
job."

His voice had risen and Red had to pull at him. "You want them to hear
us?" he whispered indignantly.

"Well, it is, too, a space-ship."

"Look here, Slim, you mean that's a ship from another world."

"It's _got_ to be. Look at my father going round and round it. He
wouldn't be so interested if it was anything else."

"Other worlds! Where are there other worlds?"

"Everywhere. How about the planets? They're worlds just like ours, some
of them. And other stars probably have planets. There's probably
zillions of planets."

Red felt outweighed and outnumbered. He muttered, "You're crazy!"

"All right, then. I'll show you."

"Hey! Where are you going?"

"Down there. I'm going to ask my father. I suppose you'll believe it if
_he_ tells you. I suppose you'll believe a Professor of Astronomy knows
what--"

He had scrambled upright.

Red said, "Hey. You don't want them to see us. We're not supposed to be
here. Do you want them to start asking questions and find out about our
animals?"

"I don't care. You said I was crazy."

"Snitcher! You promised you wouldn't tell."

"I'm _not_ going to tell. But if they find out themselves, it's your
fault, for starting an argument and saying I was crazy."

"I take it back, then," grumbled Red.

"Well, all right. You better."

In a way, Slim was disappointed. He wanted to see the space-ship at
closer quarters. Still, he could not break his vow of secrecy even in
spirit without at least the excuse of personal insult.

Red said, "It's awfully small for a space-ship."

"Sure, because it's probably a scout-ship."

"I'll bet Dad couldn't even get into the old thing."

So much Slim realized to be true. It was a weak point in his argument
and he made no answer. His interest was absorbed by the adults.

Red rose to his feet; an elaborate attitude of boredom all about him.
"Well, I guess we better be going. There's business to do and I can't
spend all day here looking at some old space-ship or whatever it is.
We've got to take care of the animals if we're going to be circus-folks.
That's the first rule with circus-folks. They've got to take care of the
animals. And," he finished virtuously, "that's what I aim to do,
anyway."

Slim said, "What for, Red? They've got plenty of meat. Let's watch."

"There's no fun in watching. Besides Dad and your father are going away
and I guess it's about lunch time."

Red became argumentative. "Look, Slim, we can't start acting suspicious
or they're going to start investigating. Holy Smokes, don't you ever
read any detective stories? When you're trying to work a big deal
without being caught, it's practically the main thing to keep on acting
just like always. Then they don't suspect anything. That's the first
law--"

"Oh, all right."

Slim rose resentfully. At the moment, the circus appeared to him a
rather tawdry and shoddy substitute for the glories of astronomy, and he
wondered how he had come to fall in with Red's silly scheme.

Down the slope they went, Slim, as usual, in the rear.


VII

The Industrialist said, "It's the workmanship that gets me. I never saw
such construction."

"What good is it now?" said the Astronomer, bitterly. "There's nothing
left. There'll be no second landing. This ship detected life on our
planet through accident. Other exploring parties would come no closer
than necessary to establish the fact that there were no super-dense
worlds existing in our solar system."

"Well, there's no quarreling with a crash landing."

"The ship hardly seems damaged. If only some had survived, the ship
might have been repaired."

"If they had survived, there would be no trade in any case. They're too
different. Too disturbing. In any case--it's over."

They entered the house and the Industrialist greeted his wife calmly.
"Lunch about ready, dear."

"I'm afraid not. You see--" She looked hesitantly at the Astronomer.

"Is anything wrong?" asked the Industrialist. "Why not tell me? I'm sure
our guest won't mind a little family discussion."

"Pray don't pay any attention whatever to me," muttered the Astronomer.
He moved miserably to the other end of the living room.

The woman said, in low, hurried tones, "Really, dear, cook's that upset.
I've been soothing her for hours and honestly, I don't know why Red
should have done it."

"Done what?" The Industrialist was more amused than otherwise. It had
taken the united efforts of himself and his son months to argue his wife
into using the name "Red" rather than the perfectly ridiculous (viewed
youngster fashion) name which was his real one.

She said, "He's taken most of the chopped meat."

"He's eaten it?"

"Well, I hope not. It was raw."

"Then what would he want it for?"

"I haven't the slightest idea. I haven't seen him since breakfast.
Meanwhile cook's just furious. She caught him vanishing out the kitchen
door and there was the bowl of chopped meat just about empty and she was
going to use it for lunch. Well, you know cook. She had to change the
lunch menu and that means she won't be worth living with for a week.
You'll just have to speak to Red, dear, and make him promise not to do
things in the kitchen any more. And it wouldn't hurt to have him
apologize to cook."

"Oh, come. She works for us. If we don't complain about a change in
lunch menu, why should she?"

"Because she's the one who has double-work made for her, and she's
talking about quitting. Good cooks aren't easy to get. Do you remember
the one before her?"

It was a strong argument.

The Industrialist looked about vaguely. He said, "I suppose you're
right. He isn't here, I suppose. When he comes in, I'll talk to him."

"You'd better start. Here he comes."

Red walked into the house and said cheerfully, "Time for lunch, I
guess." He looked from one parent to the other in quick speculation at
their fixed stares and said, "Got to clean up first, though," and made
for the other door.

The Industrialist said, "One moment, son."

"Sir?"

"Where's your little friend?"

Red said, carelessly, "He's around somewhere. We were just sort of
walking and I looked around and he wasn't there." This was perfectly
true, and Red felt on safe ground. "I told him it was lunch time. I
said, 'I suppose it's about lunch time.' I said, 'We got to be getting
back to the house.' And he said, 'Yes.' And I just went on and then when
I was about at the creek I looked around and--"

The Astronomer interrupted the voluble story, looking up from a
magazine he had been sightlessly rummaging through. "I wouldn't worry
about my youngster. He is quite self-reliant. Don't wait lunch for him."

"Lunch isn't ready in any case, Doctor." The Industrialist turned once
more to his son. "And talking about that, son, the reason for it is that
something happened to the ingredients. Do you have anything to say?"

"Sir?"

"I hate to feel that I have to explain myself more fully. Why did you
take the chopped meat?"

"The chopped meat?"

"The chopped meat." He waited patiently.

Red said, "Well, I was sort of--"

"Hungry?" prompted his father. "For raw meat?"

"No, sir. I just sort of needed it."

"For what exactly?"

Red looked miserable and remained silent.

The Astronomer broke in again. "If you don't mind my putting in a few
words--You'll remember that just after breakfast my son came in to ask
what animals ate."

"Oh, you're right. How stupid of me to forget. Look here, Red, did you
take it for an animal pet you've got?"

Red recovered indignant breath. He said, "You mean Slim came in here and
said I had an animal? He came in here and said that? He said I had an
animal?"

"No, he didn't. He simply asked what animals ate. That's all. Now if he
promised he wouldn't tell on you, he didn't. It's your own foolishness
in trying to take something without permission that gave you away. That
happened to be stealing. Now have you an animal? I ask you a direct
question."

"Yes, sir." It was a whisper so low as hardly to be heard.

"All right, you'll have to get rid of it. Do you understand?"

Red's mother intervened. "Do you mean to say you're keeping a
meat-eating animal, Red? It might bite you and give you blood-poison."

"They're only small ones," quavered Red. "They hardly budge if you touch
them."

"They? How many do you have?"

"Two."

"Where are they?"

The Industrialist touched her arm. "Don't chivvy the child any further,"
he said, in a low voice. "If he says he'll get rid of them, he will,
and that's punishment enough."

He dismissed the matter from his mind.


VIII

Lunch was half over when Slim dashed into the dining room. For a moment,
he stood abashed, and then he said in what was almost hysteria, "I've
got to speak to Red. I've got to say something."

Red looked up in fright, but the Astronomer said, "I don't think, son,
you're being very polite. You've kept lunch waiting."

"I'm sorry, Father."

"Oh, don't rate the lad," said the Industrialist's wife. "He can speak
to Red if he wants to, and there was no damage done to the lunch."

"I've got to speak to Red alone," Slim insisted.

"Now that's enough," said the Astronomer with a kind of gentleness that
was obviously manufactured for the benefit of strangers and which had
beneath it an easily-recognized edge. "Take your seat."

Slim did so, but he ate only when someone looked directly upon him. Even
then he was not very successful.

Red caught his eyes. He made soundless words, "Did the animals get
loose?"

Slim shook his head slightly. He whispered, "No, it's--"

The Astronomer looked at him hard and Slim faltered to a stop.

With lunch over, Red slipped out of the room, with a microscopic motion
at Slim to follow.

They walked in silence to the creek.

Then Red turned fiercely upon his companion. "Look here, what's the idea
of telling my Dad we were feeding animals?"

Slim said, "I didn't. I asked what you feed animals. That's not the same
as saying we were doing it. Besides, it's something else, Red."

But Red had not used up his grievances. "And where did you go anyway? I
thought you were coming to the house. They acted like it was my fault
you weren't there."

"But I'm trying to tell you about that, if you'd only shut _up_ a second
and let me talk. You don't give a fellow a chance."

"Well, go on and tell me if you've got so much to say."

"I'm _trying_ to. I went back to the space-ship. The folks weren't there
anymore and I wanted to see what it was like."

"It isn't a space-ship," said Red, sullenly. He had nothing to lose.

"It is, too. I looked inside. You could look through the ports and I
looked inside and they were _dead_." He looked sick. "They were dead."

"_Who_ were dead."

Slim screeched, "Animals! like _our_ animals! Only they _aren't_
animals. They're people-things from other planets."

For a moment Red might have been turned to stone. It didn't occur to him
to disbelieve Slim at this point. Slim looked too genuinely the bearer
of just such tidings. He said, finally, "Oh, my."

"Well, what are we going to do? Golly, will we get a whopping if they
find out?" He was shivering.

"We better turn them loose," said Red.

"They'll tell on us."

"They can't talk our language. Not if they're from another planet."

"Yes, they can. Because I remember my father talking about some stuff
like that to my mother when he didn't know I was in the room. He was
talking about visitors who could talk with the mind. Telepathery or
something. I thought he was making it up."

"Well, Holy Smokes. I mean--Holy Smokes." Red looked up. "I tell you. My
Dad said to get rid of them. Let's sort of bury them somewhere or throw
them in the creek."

"He _told_ you to do that."

"He made me say I had animals and then he said, 'Get rid of them.' I got
to do what he says. Holy Smokes, he's my Dad."

Some of the panic left Slim's heart. It was a thoroughly legalistic way
out. "Well, let's do it right now, then, before they find out. Oh,
golly, if they find out, will we be in trouble!"

They broke into a run toward the barn, unspeakable visions in their
minds.


IX

It was different, looking at them as though they were "people." As
animals, they had been interesting; as "people," horrible. Their eyes,
which were neutral little objects before, now seemed to watch them with
active malevolence.

"They're making noises," said Slim, in a whisper which was barely
audible.

"I guess they're talking or something," said Red. Funny that those
noises which they had heard before had not had significance earlier. He
was making no move toward them. Neither was Slim.

The canvas was off but they were just watching. The ground meat, Slim
noticed, hadn't been touched.

Slim said, "Aren't you going to do something?"

"Aren't you?"

"You found them."

"It's your turn, now."

"No, it isn't. You found them. It's your fault, the whole thing. I was
watching."

"You joined in, Slim. You know you did."

"I don't care. You found them and that's what I'll say when they come
here looking for us."

Red said, "All right for you." But the thought of the consequences
inspired him anyway, and he reached for the cage door.

Slim said, "Wait!"

Red was glad to. He said, "Now what's biting you?"

"One of them's got something on him that looks like it might be iron or
something."

"Where?"

"Right there. I saw it before but I thought it was just part of him. But
if he's 'people,' maybe it's a disintegrator gun."

"What's that?"

"I read about it in the books from Beforethewars. Mostly people with
space-ships have disintegrator guns. They point them at you and you get
disintegratored."

"They didn't point it at us till now," pointed out Red with his heart
not quite in it.

"I don't care. I'm not hanging around here and getting disintegratored.
I'm getting my father."

"Cowardy-cat. Yellow cowardy-cat."

"I don't care. You can call all the names you want, but if you bother
them now you'll get disintegratored. You wait and see, and it'll be all
your fault."

He made for the narrow spiral stairs that led to the main floor of the
barn, stopped at its head, then backed away.

Red's mother was moving up, panting a little with the exertion and
smiling a tight smile for the benefit of Slim in his capacity as guest.

"Red! You, Red! Are you up there? Now don't try to hide. I know this is
where you're keeping them. Cook saw where you ran with the meat."

Red quavered, "Hello, ma!"

"Now show me those nasty animals? I'm going to see to it that you get
rid of them right away."

It was over! And despite the imminent corporal punishment, Red felt
something like a load fall from him. At least the decision was out of
his hands.

"Right there, ma. I didn't do anything to them, ma. I didn't know. They
just looked like little animals and I thought you'd let me keep them,
ma. I wouldn't have taken the meat only they wouldn't eat grass or
leaves and we couldn't find good nuts or berries and cook never lets me
have anything or I would have asked her and I didn't know it was for
lunch and--"

He was speaking on the sheer momentum of terror and did not realize that
his mother did not hear him but, with eyes frozen and popping at the
cage, was screaming in thin, piercing tones.


X

The Astronomer was saying, "A quiet burial is all we can do. There is no
point in any publicity now," when they heard the screams.

She had not entirely recovered by the time she reached them, running and
running. It was minutes before her husband could extract sense from her.

She was saying, finally, "I tell you they're in the barn. I don't know
what they are. No, no--"

She barred the Industrialist's quick movement in that direction. She
said, "Don't _you_ go. Send one of the hands with a shotgun. I tell you
I never saw anything like it. Little horrible beasts with--with--I can't
describe it. To think that Red was touching them and trying to feed
them. He was _holding_ them, and feeding them meat."

Red began, "I only--"

And Slim said, "It was not--"

The Industrialist said, quickly, "Now you boys have done enough harm
today. March! Into the house! And not a word; not one word! I'm not
interested in anything you have to say. After this is all over, I'll
hear you out and as for you, Red, I'll see that you're properly
punished."

He turned to his wife. "Now whatever the animals are, we'll have them
killed." He added quietly once the youngsters were out of hearing,
"Come, come. The children aren't hurt and, after all, they haven't done
anything really terrible. They've just found a new pet."

The Astronomer spoke with difficulty. "Pardon me, ma'am, but can you
describe these animals?"

She shook her head. She was quite beyond words.

"Can you just tell me if they--"

"I'm sorry," said the Industrialist, apologetically, "but I think I had
better take care of her. Will you excuse me?"

"A moment. Please. One moment. She said she had never seen such animals
before. Surely it is not usual to find animals that are completely
unique on an estate such as this."

"I'm sorry. Let's not discuss that now."

"Except that unique animals might have landed during the night."

The Industrialist stepped away from his wife. "What are you implying?"

"I think we had better go to the barn, sir!"

The Industrialist stared a moment, turned and suddenly and quite
uncharacteristically began running. The Astronomer followed and the
woman's wail rose unheeded behind them.


XI

The Industrialist stared, looked at the Astronomer, turned to stare
again.

"Those?"

"Those," said the Astronomer. "I have no doubt we appear strange and
repulsive to them."

"What do they say?"

"Why, that they are uncomfortable and tired and even a little sick, but
that they are not seriously damaged, and that the youngsters treated
them well."

"Treated them well! Scooping them up, keeping them in a cage, giving
them grass and raw meat to eat? Tell me how to speak to them."

"It may take a little time. Think _at_ them. Try to listen. It will come
to you, but perhaps not right away."

The Industrialist tried. He grimaced with the effort of it, thinking
over and over again, "The youngsters were ignorant of your identity."

And the thought was suddenly in his mind: "We were quite aware of it and
because we knew they meant well by us according to their own view of the
matter, we did not attempt to attack them."

"Attack them?" thought the Industrialist, and said it aloud in his
concentration.

"Why, yes," came the answering thought. "We are armed."

One of the revolting little creatures in the cage lifted a metal object
and there was a sudden hole in the top of the cage and another in the
roof of the barn, each hole rimmed with charred wood.

"We hope," the creatures thought, "it will not be too difficult to make
repairs."

The Industrialist found it impossible to organize himself to the point
of directed thought. He turned to the Astronomer. "And with that weapon
in their possession they let themselves be handled and caged? I don't
understand it."

But the calm thought came, "We would not harm the young of an
intelligent species."


XII

It was twilight. The Industrialist had entirely missed the evening meal
and remained unaware of the fact.

He said, "Do you really think the ship will fly?"

"If they say so," said the Astronomer, "I'm sure it will. They'll be
back, I hope, before too long."

"And when they do," said the Industrialist, energetically, "I will keep
my part of the agreement. What is more I will move sky and earth to have
the world accept them. I was entirely wrong, Doctor. Creatures that
would refuse to harm children, under such provocation as they received,
are admirable. But you know--I almost hate to say this--"

"Say what?"

"The kids. Yours and mine. I'm almost proud of them. Imagine seizing
these creatures, feeding them or trying to, and keeping them hidden. The
amazing gall of it. Red told me it was his idea to get a job in a circus
on the strength of them. Imagine!"

The Astronomer said, "Youth!"


XIII

The Merchant said, "Will we be taking off soon?"

"Half an hour," said the Explorer.

It was going to be a lonely trip back. All the remaining seventeen of
the crew were dead and their ashes were to be left on a strange planet.
Back they would go with a limping ship and the burden of the controls
entirely on himself.

The Merchant said, "It was a good business stroke, not harming the young
ones. We will get very good terms; _very_ good terms."

The Explorer thought: Business!

The Merchant then said, "They've lined up to see us off. All of them.
You don't think they're too close, do you? It would be bad to burn any
of them with the rocket blast at this stage of the game."

"They're safe."

"Horrible-looking things, aren't they?"

"Pleasant enough, inside. Their thoughts are perfectly friendly."

"You wouldn't believe it of them. That immature one, the one that first
picked us up--"

"They call him Red," provided the Explorer.

"That's a queer name for a monster. Makes me laugh. He actually feels
_bad_ that we're leaving. Only I can't make out exactly why. The nearest
I can come to it is something about a lost opportunity with some
organization or other that I can't quite interpret."

"A circus," said the Explorer, briefly.

"What? Why, the impertinent monstrosity."

"Why not? What would you have done if you had found _him_ wandering on
_your_ native world; found him sleeping on a field on Earth, red
tentacles, six legs, pseudopods and all?"


XIV

Red watched the ship leave. His red tentacles, which gave him his
nickname, quivered their regret at lost opportunity to the very last,
and the eyes at their tips filled with drifting yellowish crystals that
were the equivalent of Earthly tears.

_BOOKEND_


FLATLAND



1

THIS WORLD



1
Of the Nature of Flatland


I call our world Flatland, not because we call it so, but to make its
nature clearer to you, my happy readers, who are privileged to live in
Space.

Imagine a vast sheet of paper on which straight Lines, Triangles,
Squares, Pentagons, Hexagons, and other figures, instead of remaining
fixed in their places, move freely about, on or in the surface, but
without the power of rising above or sinking below it, very much like
shadows--only hard with luminous edges--and you will then have a pretty
correct notion of my country and countrymen.  Alas, a few years ago, I
should have said "my universe:"  but now my mind has been opened to
higher views of things.

In such a country, you will perceive at once that it is impossible that
there should be anything of what you call a "solid" kind; but I dare
say you will suppose that we could at least distinguish by sight the
Triangles, Squares, and other figures, moving about as I have described
them.  On the contrary, we could see nothing of the kind, not at least
so as to distinguish one figure from another.  Nothing was visible, nor
could be visible, to us, except Straight Lines; and the necessity of
this I will speedily demonstrate.

Place a penny on the middle of one of your tables in Space; and leaning
over it, look down upon it.  It will appear a circle.

But now, drawing back to the edge of the table, gradually lower your
eye (thus bringing yourself more and more into the condition of the
inhabitants of Flatland), and you will find the penny becoming more and
more oval to your view, and at last when you have placed your eye
exactly on the edge of the table (so that you are, as it were, actually
a Flatlander) the penny will then have ceased to appear oval at all,
and will have become, so far as you can see, a straight line.

The same thing would happen if you were to treat in the same way a
Triangle, or a Square, or any other figure cut out from pasteboard.  As
soon as you look at it with your eye on the edge of the table, you will
find that it ceases to appear to you as a figure, and that it becomes
in appearance a straight line.  Take for example an equilateral
Triangle--who represents with us a Tradesman of the respectable class.
Figure 1 represents the Tradesman as you would see him while you were
bending over him from above; figures 2 and 3 represent the Tradesman,
as you would see him if your eye were close to the level, or all but on
the level of the table; and if your eye were quite on the level of the
table (and that is how we see him in Flatland) you would see nothing
but a straight line.

When I was in Spaceland I heard that your sailors have very similar
experiences while they traverse your seas and discern some distant
island or coast lying on the horizon.  The far-off land may have bays,
forelands, angles in and out to any number and extent; yet at a
distance you see none of these (unless indeed your sun shines bright
upon them revealing the projections and retirements by means of light
and shade), nothing but a grey unbroken line upon the water.

Well, that is just what we see when one of our triangular or other
acquaintances comes towards us in Flatland.  As there is neither sun
with us, nor any light of such a kind as to make shadows, we have none
of the helps to the sight that you have in Spaceland.  If our friend
comes closer to us we see his line becomes larger; if he leaves us it
becomes smaller; but still he looks like a straight line; be he a
Triangle, Square, Pentagon, Hexagon, Circle, what you will--a straight
Line he looks and nothing else.

You may perhaps ask how under these disadvantagous circumstances we are
able to distinguish our friends from one another: but the answer to
this very natural question will be more fitly and easily given when I
come to describe the inhabitants of Flatland.  For the present let me
defer this subject, and say a word or two about the climate and houses
in our country.




2
  Of the Climate and Houses in Flatland


As with you, so also with us, there are four points of the compass
North, South, East, and West.

There being no sun nor other heavenly bodies, it is impossible for us
to determine the North in the usual way; but we have a method of our
own.  By a Law of Nature with us, there is a constant attraction to the
South; and, although in temperate climates this is very slight--so that
even a Woman in reasonable health can journey several furlongs
northward without much difficulty--yet the hampering effort of the
southward attraction is quite sufficient to serve as a compass in most
parts of our earth.  Moreover, the rain (which falls at stated
intervals) coming always from the North, is an additional assistance;
and in the towns we have the guidance of the houses, which of course
have their side-walls running for the most part North and South, so
that the roofs may keep off the rain from the North.  In the country,
where there are no houses, the trunks of the trees serve as some sort
of guide.  Altogether, we have not so much difficulty as might be
expected in determining our bearings.

Yet in our more temperate regions, in which the southward attraction is
hardly felt, walking sometimes in a perfectly desolate plain where
there have been no houses nor trees to guide me, I have been
occasionally compelled to remain stationary for hours together, waiting
till the rain came before continuing my journey.  On the weak and aged,
and especially on delicate Females, the force of attraction tells much
more heavily than on the robust of the Male Sex, so that it is a point
of breeding, if you meet a Lady on the street, always to give her the
North side of the way--by no means an easy thing to do always at short
notice when you are in rude health and in a climate where it is
difficult to tell your North from your South.

Windows there are none in our houses:  for the light comes to us alike
in our homes and out of them, by day and by night, equally at all times
and in all places, whence we know not.  It was in old days, with our
learned men, an interesting and oft-investigate question, "What is the
origin of light?" and the solution of it has been repeatedly attempted,
with no other result than to crowd our lunatic asylums with the
would-be solvers.  Hence, after fruitless attempts to suppress such
investigations indirectly by making them liable to a heavy tax, the
Legislature, in comparatively recent times, absolutely prohibited them.
I--alas, I alone in Flatland--know now only too well the true solution
of this mysterious problem; but my knowledge cannot be made
intelligible to a single one of my countrymen; and I am mocked at--I,
the sole possessor of the truths of Space and of the theory of the
introduction of Light from the world of three Dimensions--as if I were
the maddest of the mad!  But a truce to these painful digressions:  let
me return to our homes.

The most common form for the construction of a house is five-sided or
pentagonal, as in the annexed figure.  The two Northern sides RO, OF,
constitute the roof, and for the most part have no doors; on the East
is a small door for the Women; on the West a much larger one for the
Men; the South side or floor is usually doorless.

Square and triangular houses are not allowed, and for this reason.  The
angles of a Square (and still more those of an equilateral Triangle,)
being much more pointed than those of a Pentagon, and the lines of
inanimate objects (such as houses) being dimmer than the lines of Men
and Women, it follows that there is no little danger lest the points of
a square or triangular house residence might do serious injury to an
inconsiderate or perhaps absentminded traveller suddenly running
against them: and therefore, as early as the eleventh century of our
era, triangular houses were universally forbidden by Law, the only
exceptions being fortifications, powder-magazines, barracks, and other
state buildings, which is not desirable that the general public should
approach without circumspection.

At this period, square houses were still everywhere permitted, though
discouraged by a special tax.  But, about three centuries afterwards,
the Law decided that in all towns containing a population above ten
thousand, the angle of a Pentagon was the smallest house-angle that
could be allowed consistently with the public safety.  The good sense
of the community has seconded the efforts of the Legislature; and now,
even in the country, the pentagonal construction has superseded every
other.  It is only now and then in some very remote and backward
agricultural district that an antiquarian may still discover a square
house.




3
  Concerning the Inhabitants of Flatland


The greatest length or breadth of a full grown inhabitant of Flatland
may be estimated at about eleven of your inches.  Twelve inches may be
regarded as a maximum.

Our Women are Straight Lines.

Our Soldiers and Lowest Class of Workmen are Triangles with two equal
sides, each about eleven inches long, and a base or third side so short
(often not exceeding half an inch) that they form at their vertices a
very sharp and formidable angle.  Indeed when their bases are of the
most degraded type (not more than the eighth part of an inch in size),
they can hardly be distinguished from Straight lines or Women; so
extremely pointed are their vertices.  With us, as with you, these
Triangles are distinguished from others by being called Isosceles; and
by this name I shall refer to them in the following pages.

Our Middle Class consists of Equilateral or Equal-Sided Triangles.

Our Professional Men and Gentlemen are Squares (to which class I myself
belong) and Five-Sided Figures or Pentagons.

Next above these come the Nobility, of whom there are several degrees,
beginning at Six-Sided Figures, or Hexagons, and from thence rising in
the number of their sides till they receive the honourable title of
Polygonal, or many-Sided. Finally when the number of the sides becomes
so numerous, and the sides themselves so small, that the figure cannot
be distinguished from a circle, he is included in the Circular or
Priestly order; and this is the highest class of all.

It is a Law of Nature with us that a male child shall have one more
side than his father, so that each generation shall rise (as a rule)
one step in the scale of development and nobility. Thus the son of a
Square is a Pentagon; the son of a Pentagon, a Hexagon; and so on.

But this rule applies not always to the Tradesman, and still less often
to the Soldiers, and to the Workmen; who indeed can hardly be said to
deserve the name of human Figures, since they have not all their sides
equal.  With them therefore the Law of Nature does not hold; and the
son of an Isosceles (i.e. a Triangle with two sides equal) remains
Isosceles still.  Nevertheless, all hope is not such out, even from the
Isosceles, that his posterity may ultimately rise above his degraded
condition.  For, after a long series of military successes, or diligent
and skillful labours, it is generally found that the more intelligent
among the Artisan and Soldier classes manifest a slight increase of
their third side or base, and a shrinkage of the two other sides.
Intermarriages (arranged by the Priests) between the sons and daughters
of these more intellectual members of the lower classes generally
result in an offspring approximating still more to the type of the
Equal-Sided Triangle.

Rarely--in proportion to the vast numbers of Isosceles births--is a
genuine and certifiable Equal-Sided Triangle produced from Isosceles
parents (footnote 1).  Such a birth requires, as its antecedents, not
only a series of carefully arranged intermarriages, but also a
long-continued exercise of frugality and self-control on the part of
the would-be ancestors of the coming Equilateral, and a patient,
systematic, and continuous development of the Isosceles intellect
through many generations.

The birth of a True Equilateral Triangle from Isosceles parents is the
subject of rejoicing in our country for many furlongs round.  After a
strict examination conducted by the Sanitary and Social Board, the
infant, if certified as Regular, is with solemn ceremonial admitted
into the class of Equilaterals.  He is then immediately taken from his
proud yet sorrowing parents and adopted by some childless Equilateral,
who is bound by oath never to permit the child henceforth to enter his
former home or so much as to look upon his relations again, for fear
lest the freshly developed organism may, by force of unconscious
imitation, fall back again into his hereditary level.

The occasional emergence of an Equilateral from the ranks of his
serf-born ancestors is welcomed, not only by the poor serfs themselves,
as a gleam of light and hope shed upon the monotonous squalor of their
existence, but also by the Aristocracy at large; for all the higher
classes are well aware that these rare phenomena, while they do little
or nothing to vulgarize their own privileges, serve as almost useful
barrier against revolution from below.

Had the acute-angled rabble been all, without exception, absolutely
destitute of hope and of ambition, they might have found leaders in
some of their many seditious outbreaks, so able as to render their
superior numbers and strength too much even for the wisdom of the
Circles.  But a wise ordinance of Nature has decreed that in proportion
as the working-classes increase in intelligence, knowledge, and all
virtue, in that same proportion their acute angle (which makes them
physically terrible) shall increase also and approximate to their
comparatively harmless angle of the Equilateral Triangle.  Thus, in the
most brutal and formidable off the soldier class--creatures almost on a
level with women in their lack of intelligence--it is found that, as
they wax in the mental ability necessary to employ their tremendous
penetrating power to advantage, so do they wane in the power of
penetration itself.

How admirable is the Law of Compensation!  And how perfect a proof of
the natural fitness and, I may almost say, the divine origin of the
aristocratic constitution of the States of Flatland!  By a judicious
use of this Law of Nature, the Polygons and Circles are almost always
able to stifle sedition in its very cradle, taking advantage of the
irrepressible and boundless hopefulness of the human mind.  Art also
comes to the aid of Law and Order.  It is generally found possible--by
a little artificial compression or expansion on the part of the State
physicians--to make some of the more intelligent leaders of a rebellion
perfectly Regular, and to admit them at once into the privileged
classes; a much larger number, who are still below the standard,
allured by the prospect of being ultimately ennobled, are induced to
enter the State Hospitals, where they are kept in honourable
confinement for life; one or two alone of the most obstinate, foolish,
and hopelessly irregular are led to execution.

Then the wretched rabble of the Isosceles, planless and leaderless, are
either transfixed without resistance by the small body of their
brethren whom the Chief Circle keeps in pay for emergencies of this
kind; or else more often, by means of jealousies and suspicious
skillfully fomented among them by the Circular party, they are stirred
to mutual warfare, and perish by one another's angles.  No less than
one hundred and twenty rebellions are recorded in our annals, besides
minor outbreaks numbered at two hundred and thirty-five; and they have
all ended thus.



Footnote 1.  "What need of a certificate?" a Spaceland critic may ask:
"Is not the procreation of a Square Son a certificate from Nature
herself, proving the Equal-sidedness of the Father?" I reply that no
Lady of any position will mary an uncertified Triangle.  Square
offspring has sometimes resulted from a slightly Irregular Triangle;
but in almost every such case the Irregularity of the first generation
is visited on the third; which either fails to attain the Pentagonal
rank, or relapses to the Triangular.




4
  Concerning the Women


If our highly pointed Triangles of the Soldier class are formidable, it
may be readily inferred that far more formidable are our Women.  For,
if a Soldier is a wedge, a Woman is a needle; being, so to speak, ALL
point, at least at the two extremities.  Add to this the power of
making herself practically invisible at will, and you will perceive
that a Female, in Flatland, is a creature by no means to be trifled
with.

But here, perhaps, some of my younger Readers may ask HOW a woman in
Flatland can make herself invisible.  This ought, I think, to be
apparent without any explanation.  However, a few words will make it
clear to the most unreflecting.

Place a needle on the table.  Then, with your eye on the level of the
table, look at it side-ways, and you see the whole length of it; but
look at it end-ways, and you see nothing but a point, it has become
practically invisible.  Just so is it with one of our Women.  When her
side is turned towards us, we see her as a straight line; when the end
containing her eye or mouth--for with us these two organs are
identical--is the part that meets our eye, then we see nothing but a
highly lustrous point; but when the back is presented to our view,
then--being only sub-lustrous, and, indeed, almost as dim as an
inanimate object--her hinder extremity serves her as a kind of
Invisible Cap.

The dangers to which we are exposed from our Women must now be manifest
to the meanest capacity of Spaceland.  If even the angle of a
respectable Triangle in the middle class is not without its dangers; if
to run against a Working Man involves a gash; if collision with an
Officer of the military class necessitates a serious wound; if a mere
touch from the vertex of a Private Soldier brings with it danger of
death;--what can it be to run against a woman, except absolute and
immediate destruction?  And when a Woman is invisible, or visible only
as a dim sub-lustrous point, how difficult must it be, even for the
most cautious, always to avoid collision!

Many are the enactments made at different times in the different States
of Flatland, in order to minimize this peril; and in the Southern and
less temperate climates, where the force of gravitation is greater, and
human beings more liable to casual and involuntary motions, the Laws
concerning Women are naturally much more stringent.  But a general view
of the Code may be obtained from the following summary:--

1.  Every house shall have one entrance on the Eastern side, for the
use of Females only; by which all females shall enter "in a becoming
and respectful manner" (footnote 1) and not by the Men's or Western
door.

2.  No Female shall walk in any public place without continually
keeping up her Peace-cry, under penalty of death.

3.  Any Female, duly certified to be suffering from St. Vitus's Dance,
fits, chronic cold accompanied by violent sneezing, or any disease
necessitating involuntary motions, shall be instantly destroyed.

In some of the States there is an additional Law forbidding Females,
under penalty of death, from walking or standing in any public place
without moving their backs constantly from right to left so as to
indicate their presence to those behind them; others oblige a Woman,
when travelling, to be followed by one of her sons, or servants, or by
her husband; others confine Women altogether in their houses except
during the religious festivals.  But it has been found by the wisest of
our Circles or Statesmen that the multiplication of restrictions on
Females tends not only to the debilitation and diminution of the race,
but also to the increase of domestic murders to such an extent that a
State loses more than it gains by a too prohibitive Code.

For whenever the temper of the Women is thus exasperated by confinement
at home or hampering regulations abroad, they are apt to vent their
spleen upon their husbands and children; and in the less temperate
climates the whole male population of a village has been sometimes
destroyed in one or two hours of a simultaneous female outbreak.  Hence
the Three Laws, mentioned above, suffice for the better regulated
States, and may be accepted as a rough exemplification of our Female
Code.

After all, our principal safeguard is found, not in Legislature, but in
the interests of the Women themselves.  For, although they can inflict
instantaneous death by a retrograde movement, yet unless they can at
once disengage their stinging extremity from the struggling body of
their victim, their own frail bodies are liable to be shattered.

The power of Fashion is also on our side.  I pointed out that in some
less civilized States no female is suffered to stand in any public
place without swaying her back from right to left.  This practice has
been universal among ladies of any pretensions to breeding in all
well-governed States, as far back as the memory of Figures can reach.
It is considered a disgrace to any state that legislation should have
to enforce what ought to be, and is in every respectable female, a
natural instinct.  The rhythmical and, if I may so say, well-modulated
undulation of the back in our ladies of Circular rank is envied and
imitated by the wife of a common Equilateral, who can achieve nothing
beyond a mere monotonous swing, like the ticking of a pendulum; and the
regular tick of the Equilateral is no less admired and copied by the
wife of the progressive and aspiring Isosceles, in the females of whose
family no "back-motion" of any kind has become as yet a necessity of
life.  Hence, in every family of position and consideration, "back
motion" is as prevalent as time itself; and the husbands and sons in
these households enjoy immunity at least from invisible attacks.

Not that it must be for a moment supposed that our Women are destitute
of affection.  But unfortunately the passion of the moment
predominates, in the Frail Sex, over every other consideration.  This
is, of course, a necessity arising from their unfortunate conformation.
For as they have no pretensions to an angle, being inferior in this
respect to the very lowest of the Isosceles, they are consequently
wholly devoid of brainpower, and have neither reflection, judgment nor
forethought, and hardly any memory.  Hence, in their fits of fury, they
remember no claims and recognize no distinctions.  I have actually
known a case where a Woman has exterminated her whole household, and
half an hour afterwards, when her rage was over and the fragments swept
away, has asked what has become of her husband and children.

Obviously then a Woman is not to be irritated as long as she is in a
position where she can turn round.  When you have them in their
apartments--which are constructed with a view to denying them that
power--you can say and do what you like; for they are then wholly
impotent for mischief, and will not remember a few minutes hence the
incident for which they may be at this moment threatening you with
death, nor the promises which you may have found it necessary to make
in order to pacify their fury.

On the whole we got on pretty smoothly in our domestic relations,
except in the lower strata of the Military Classes.  There the want of
tact and discretion on the part of the husbands produces at times
indescribable disasters.  Relying too much on the offensive weapons of
their acute angles instead of the defensive organs of good sense and
seasonable simulations, these reckless creatures too often neglect the
prescribed construction of the women's apartments, or irritate their
wives by ill-advised expressions out of doors, which they refuse
immediately to retract.  Moreover a blunt and stolid regard for literal
truth indisposes them to make those lavish promises by which the more
judicious Circle can in a moment pacify his consort.  The result is
massacre; not, however, without its advantages, as it eliminates the
more brutal and troublesome of the Isosceles; and by many of our
Circles the destructiveness of the Thinner Sex is regarded as one among
many providential arrangements for suppressing redundant population,
and nipping Revolution in the bud.

Yet even in our best regulated and most approximately Circular families
I cannot say that the ideal of family life is so high as with you in
Spaceland.  There is peace, in so far as the absence of slaughter may
be called by that name, but there is necessarily little harmony of
tastes or pursuits; and the cautious wisdom of the Circles has ensured
safety at the cost of domestic comfort.  In every Circular or Polygonal
household it has been a habit from time immemorial--and now has become
a kind of instinct among the women of our higher classes--that the
mothers and daughters should constantly keep their eyes and mouths
towards their husband and his male friends; and for a lady in a family
of distinction to turn her back upon her husband would be regarded as a
kind of portent, involving loss of STATUS.  But, as I shall soon shew,
this custom, though it has the advantage of safety, is not without
disadvantages.

In the house of the Working Man or respectable Tradesman--where the
wife is allowed to turn her back upon her husband, while pursuing her
household avocations--there are at least intervals of quiet, when the
wife is neither seen nor heard, except for the humming sound of the
continuous Peace-cry; but in the homes of the upper classes there is
too often no peace.  There the voluble mouth and bright penetrating eye
are ever directed toward the Master of the household; and light itself
is not more persistent than the stream of Feminine discourse.  The tact
and skill which suffice to avert a Woman's sting are unequal to the
task of stopping a Woman's mouth; and as the wife has absolutely
nothing to say, and absolutely no constraint of wit, sense, or
conscience to prevent her from saying it, not a few cynics have been
found to aver that they prefer the danger of the death-dealing but
inaudible sting to the safe sonorousness of a Woman's other end.

To my readers in Spaceland the condition of our Women may seen truly
deplorable, and so indeed it is.  A Male of the lowest type of the
Isosceles may look forward to some improvement of his angle, and to the
ultimate elevation of the whole of his degraded caste; but no Woman can
entertain such hopes for her sex.  "Once a Woman, always a Woman" is a
Decree of Nature; and the very Laws of Evolution seem suspended in her
disfavour.  Yet at least we can admire the wise Prearrangement which
has ordained that, as they have no hopes, so they shall have no memory
to recall, and no forethought to anticipate, the miseries and
humiliations which are at once a necessity of their existence and the
basis of the constitution of Flatland.




5
  Of our Methods of Recognizing one another


You, who are blessed with shade as well as light, you, who are gifted
with two eyes, endowed with a knowledge of perspective, and charmed
with the enjoyment of various colours, you, who can actually SEE an
angle, and contemplate the complete circumference of a Circle in the
happy region of the Three Dimensions--how shall I make it clear to you
the extreme difficulty which we in Flatland experience in recognizing
one another's configuration?

Recall what I told you above.  All beings in Flatland, animate and
inanimate, no matter what their form, present TO OUR VIEW the same, or
nearly the same, appearance, viz. that of a straight Line.  How then
can one be distinguished from another, where all appear the same?

The answer is threefold.  The first means of recognition is the sense
of hearing; which with us is far more highly developed than with you,
and which enables us not only to distinguish by the voice of our
personal friends, but even to discriminate between different classes,
at least so far as concerns the three lowest orders, the Equilateral,
the Square, and the Pentagon--for the Isosceles I take no account.  But
as we ascend the social scale, the process of discriminating and being
discriminated by hearing increases in difficulty, partly because voices
are assimilated, partly because the faculty of voice-discrimination is
a plebeian virtue not much developed among the Aristocracy.  And
wherever there is any danger of imposture we cannot trust to this
method.  Amongst our lowest orders, the vocal organs are developed to a
degree more than correspondent with those of hearing, so that an
Isosceles can easily feign the voice of a Polygon, and, with some
training, that of a Circle himself.  A second method is therefore more
commonly resorted to.

FEELING is, among our Women and lower classes--about our upper classes
I shall speak presently--the principal test of recognition, at all
events between strangers, and when the question is, not as to the
individual, but as to the class.  What therefore "introduction" is
among the higher classes in Spaceland, that the process of "feeling" is
with us.  "Permit me to ask you to feel and be felt by my friend Mr.
So-and-so"--is still, among the more old-fashioned of our country
gentlemen in districts remote from towns, the customary formula for a
Flatland introduction.  But in the towns, and among men of business,
the words "be felt by" are omitted and the sentence is abbreviated to,
"Let me ask you to feel Mr. So-and-so"; although it is assumed, of
course, that the "feeling" is to be reciprocal.  Among our still more
modern and dashing young gentlemen--who are extremely averse to
superfluous effort and supremely indifferent to the purity of their
native language--the formula is still further curtailed by the use of
"to feel" in a technical sense, meaning, "to
recommend-for-the-purposes-of-feeling-and-being-felt"; and at this
moment the "slang" of polite or fast society in the upper classes
sanctions such a barbarism as "Mr. Smith, permit me to feel Mr. Jones."

Let not my Reader however suppose that "feeling" is with us the tedious
process that it would be with you, or that we find it necessary to feel
right round all the sides of every individual before we determine the
class to which he belongs.  Long practice and training, begun in the
schools and continued in the experience of daily life, enable us to
discriminate at once by the sense of touch, between the angles of an
equal-sided Triangle, Square, and Pentagon; and I need not say that the
brainless vertex of an acute-angled Isosceles is obvious to the dullest
touch.  It is therefore not necessary, as a rule, to do more than feel
a single angle of an individual; and this, once ascertained, tells us
the class of the person whom we are addressing, unless indeed he
belongs to the higher sections of the nobility.  There the difficulty
is much greater.  Even a Master of Arts in our University of Wentbridge
has been known to confuse a ten-sided with a twelve-sided Polygon; and
there is hardly a Doctor of Science in or out of that famous University
who could pretend to decide promptly and unhesitatingly between a
twenty-sided and a twenty-four sided member of the Aristocracy.

Those of my readers who recall the extracts I gave above from the
Legislative code concerning Women, will readily perceive that the
process of introduction by contact requires some care and discretion.
Otherwise the angles might inflict on the unwary Feeling irreparable
injury.  It is essential for the safety of the Feeler that the Felt
should stand perfectly still.  A start, a fidgety shifting of the
position, yes, even a violent sneeze, has been known before now to
prove fatal to the incautious, and to nip in the bud many a promising
friendship.  Especially is this true among the lower classes of the
Triangles.  With them, the eye is situated so far from their vertex
that they can scarcely take cognizance of what goes on at that
extremity of their frame.  They are, moreover, of a rough coarse
nature, not sensitive to the delicate touch of the highly organized
Polygon.  What wonder then if an involuntary toss of the head has ere
now deprived the State of a valuable life!

I have heard that my excellent Grandfather--one of the least irregular
of his unhappy Isosceles class, who indeed obtained, shortly before his
decease, four out of seven votes from the Sanitary and Social Board for
passing him into the class of the Equal-sided--often deplored, with a
tear in his venerable eye, a miscarriage of this kind, which had
occurred to his great-great-great-Grandfather, a respectable Working
Man with an angle or brain of 59 degrees 30 minutes.  According to his
account, my unfortunately Ancestor, being afflicted with rheumatism,
and in the act of being felt by a Polygon, by one sudden start
accidentally transfixed the Great Man through the diagonal and thereby,
partly in consequence of his long imprisonment and degradation, and
partly because of the moral shock which pervaded the whole of my
Ancestor's relations, threw back our family a degree and a half in
their ascent towards better things.  The result was that in the next
generation the family brain was registered at only 58 degrees, and not
till the lapse of five generations was the lost ground recovered, the
full 60 degrees attained, and the Ascent from the Isosceles finally
achieved.  And all this series of calamities from one little accident
in the process of Feeling.

As this point I think I hear some of my better educated readers
exclaim, "How could you in Flatland know anything about angles and
degrees, or minutes?  We SEE an angle, because we, in the region of
Space, can see two straight lines inclined to one another; but you, who
can see nothing but on straight line at a time, or at all events only a
number of bits of straight lines all in one straight line,--how can you
ever discern an angle, and much less register angles of different
sizes?"

I answer that though we cannot SEE angles, we can INFER them, and this
with great precision.  Our sense of touch, stimulated by necessity, and
developed by long training, enables us to distinguish angles far more
accurately than your sense of sight, when unaided by a rule or measure
of angles.  Nor must I omit to explain that we have great natural
helps.  It is with us a Law of Nature that the brain of the Isosceles
class shall begin at half a degree, or thirty minutes, and shall
increase (if it increases at all) by half a degree in every generation
until the goal of 60 degrees is reached, when the condition of serfdom
is quitted, and the freeman enters the class of Regulars.

Consequently, Nature herself supplies us with an ascending scale or
Alphabet of angles for half a degree up to 60 degrees, Specimen of
which are placed in every Elementary School throughout the land.  Owing
to occasional retrogressions, to still more frequent moral and
intellectual stagnation, and to the extraordinary fecundity of the
Criminal and Vagabond classes, there is always a vast superfluity of
individuals of the half degree and single degree class, and a fair
abundance of Specimens up to 10 degrees.  These are absolutely
destitute of civil rights; and a great number of them, not having even
intelligence enough for the purposes of warfare, are devoted by the
States to the service of education.  Fettered immovably so as to remove
all possibility of danger, they are placed in the classrooms of our
Infant Schools, and there they are utilized by the Board of Education
for the purpose of imparting to the offspring of the Middle Classes the
tact and intelligence which these wretched creatures themselves are
utterly devoid.

In some States the Specimens are occasionally fed and suffered to exist
for several years; but in the more temperate and better regulated
regions, it is found in the long run more advantageous for the
educational interests of the young, to dispense with food, and to renew
the Specimens every month--which is about the average duration of the
foodless existence of the Criminal class.  In the cheaper schools, what
is gained by the longer existence of the Specimen is lost, partly in
the expenditure for food, and partly in the diminished accuracy of the
angles, which are impaired after a few weeks of constant "feeling." Nor
must we forget to add, in enumerating the advantages of the more
expensive system, that it tends, though slightly yet perceptibly, to
the diminution of the redundant Isosceles population--an object which
every statesman in Flatland constantly keeps in view.  On the whole
therefore--although I am not ignorant that, in many popularly elected
School Boards, there is a reaction in favour of "the cheap system" as
it is called--I am myself disposed to think that this is one of the
many cases in which expense is the truest economy.

But I must not allow questions of School Board politics to divert me
from my subject.  Enough has been said, I trust, to shew that
Recognition by Feeling is not so tedious or indecisive a process as
might have been supposed; and it is obviously more trustworthy than
Recognition by hearing.  Still there remains, as has been pointed out
above, the objection that this method is not without danger.  For this
reason many in the Middle and Lower classes, and all without exception
in the Polygonal and Circular orders, prefer a third method, the
description of which shall be reserved for the next section.




6
  Of Recognition by Sight


I am about to appear very inconsistent.  In the previous sections I
have said that all figures in Flatland present the appearance of a
straight line; and it was added or implied, that it is consequently
impossible to distinguish by the visual organ between individuals of
different classes:  yet now I am about to explain to my Spaceland
critics how we are able to recognize one another by the sense of sight.

If however the Reader will take the trouble to refer to the passage in
which Recognition by Feeling is stated to be universal, he will find
this qualification--"among the lower classes." It is only among the
higher classes and in our more temperate climates that Sight
Recognition is practised.

That this power exists in any regions and for any classes is the result
of Fog; which prevails during the greater part of the year in all parts
save the torrid zones.  That which is with you in Spaceland an unmixed
evil, blotting out the landscape, depressing the spirits, and
enfeebling the health, is by us recognized as a blessing scarcely
inferior to air itself, and as the Nurse of arts and Parent of
sciences.  But let me explain my meaning, without further eulogies on
this beneficent Element.

If Fog were non-existent, all lines would appear equally and
indistinguishably clear; and this is actually the case in those unhappy
countries in which the atmosphere is perfectly dry and transparent.
But wherever there is a rich supply of Fog, objects that are at a
distance, say of three feet, are appreciably dimmer than those at the
distance of two feet eleven inches; and the result is that by careful
and constant experimental observation of comparative dimness and
clearness, we are enabled to infer with great exactness the
configuration of the object observed.

An instance will do more than a volume of generalities to make my
meaning clear.

Suppose I see two individuals approaching whose rank I wish to
ascertain.  They are, we will suppose, a Merchant and a Physician, or
in other words, an Equilateral Triangle and a Pentagon; how am I to
distinguish them?

It will be obvious, to every child in Spaceland who has touched the
threshold of Geometrical Studies, that, if I can bring my eye so that
its glance may bisect an angle (A) of the approaching stranger, my view
will lie as it were evenly between the two sides that are next to me
(viz. CA and AB), so that I shall contemplate the two impartially, and
both will appear of the same size.

Now in the case of (1) the Merchant, what shall I see?  I shall see a
straight line DAE, in which the middle point (A) will be very bright
because it is nearest to me; but on either side the line will shade
away RAPIDLY TO DIMNESS, because the sides AC and AB RECEDE RAPIDLY
INTO THE FOG and what appear to me as the Merchant's extremities, viz.
D and E, will be VERY DIM INDEED.

On the other hand in the case of (2) the Physician, though I shall here
also see a line (D'A'E') with a bright centre (A'), yet it will shade
away LESS RAPIDLY to dimness, because the sides (A'C', A'B') RECEDE
LESS RAPIDLY INTO THE FOG:  and what appear to me the Physician's
extremities, viz. D' and E', will not be NOT SO DIM as the extremities
of the Merchant.

The Reader will probably understand from these two instances how--after
a very long training supplemented by constant experience--it is
possible for the well-educated classes among us to discriminate with
fair accuracy between the middle and lowest orders, by the sense of
sight.  If my Spaceland Patrons have grasped this general conception,
so far as to conceive the possibility of it and not to reject my
account as altogether incredible--I shall have attained all I can
reasonably expect.  Were I to attempt further details I should only
perplex.  Yet for the sake of the young and inexperienced, who may
perchance infer--from the two simple instances I have given above, of
the manner in which I should recognize my Father and my Sons--that
Recognition by sight is an easy affair, it may be needful to point out
that in actual life most of the problems of Sight Recognition are far
more subtle and complex.

If for example, when my Father, the Triangle, approaches me, he happens
to present his side to me instead of his angle, then, until I have
asked him to rotate, or until I have edged my eye around him, I am for
the moment doubtful whether he may not be a Straight Line, or, in other
words, a Woman.  Again, when I am in the company of one of my two
hexagonal Grandsons, contemplating one of his sides (AB) full front, it
will be evident from the accompanying diagram that I shall see one
whole line (AB) in comparative brightness (shading off hardly at all at
the ends) and two smaller lines (CA and BD) dim throughout and shading
away into greater dimness towards the extremities C and D.

But I must not give way to the temptation of enlarging on these topics.
The meanest mathematician in Spaceland will readily believe me when I
assert that the problems of life, which present themselves to the
well-educated--when they are themselves in motion, rotating, advancing
or retreating, and at the same time attempting to discriminate by the
sense of sight between a number of Polygons of high rank moving in
different directions, as for example in a ball-room or
conversazione--must be of a nature to task the angularity of the most
intellectual, and amply justify the rich endowments of the Learned
Professors of Geometry, both Static and Kinetic, in the illustrious
University of Wentbridge, where the Science and Art of Sight
Recognition are regularly taught to large classes of the ELITE of the
States.

It is only a few of the scions of our noblest and wealthiest houses,
who are able to give the time and money necessary for the thorough
prosecution of this noble and valuable Art.  Even to me, a
Mathematician of no mean standing, and the Grandfather of two most
hopeful and perfectly regular Hexagons, to find myself in the midst of
a crowd of rotating Polygons of the higher classes, is occasionally
very perplexing.  And of course to a common Tradesman, or Serf, such a
sight is almost as unintelligible as it would be to you, my Reader,
were you suddenly transported to my country.

In such a crowd you could see on all sides of you nothing but a Line,
apparently straight, but of which the parts would vary irregularly and
perpetually in brightness or dimness.  Even if you had completed your
third year in the Pentagonal and Hexagonal classes in the University,
and were perfect in the theory of the subject, you would still find
there was need of many years of experience, before you could move in a
fashionable crowd without jostling against your betters, whom it is
against etiquette to ask to "feel," and who, by their superior culture
and breeding, know all about your movements, while you know very little
or nothing about theirs.  In a word, to comport oneself with perfect
propriety in Polygonal society, one ought to be a Polygon oneself.
Such at least is the painful teaching of my experience.

It is astonishing how much the Art--or I may almost call it
instinct--of Sight Recognition is developed by the habitual practice of
it and by the avoidance of the custom of "Feeling."  Just as, with you,
the deaf and dumb, if once allowed to gesticulate and to use the
hand-alphabet, will never acquire the more difficult but far more
valuable art of lip-speech and lip-reading, so it is with us as regards
"Seeing" and "Feeling." None who in early life resort to "Feeling" will
ever learn "Seeing" in perfection.

For this reason, among our Higher Classes, "Feeling" is discouraged or
absolutely forbidden.  From the cradle their children, instead of going
to the Public Elementary schools (where the art of Feeling is taught,)
are sent to higher Seminaries of an exclusive character; and at our
illustrious University, to "feel" is regarded as a most serious fault,
involving Rustication for the first offence, and Expulsion for the
second.

But among the lower classes the art of Sight Recognition is regarded as
an unattainable luxury.  A common Tradesman cannot afford to let his
son spend a third of his life in abstract studies.  The children of the
poor are therefore allowed to "feel" from their earliest years, and
they gain thereby a precocity and an early vivacity which contrast at
first most favourably with the inert, undeveloped, and listless
behaviour of the half-instructed youths of the Polygonal class; but
when the latter have at last completed their University course, and are
prepared to put their theory into practice, the change that comes over
them may almost be described as a new birth, and in every art, science,
and social pursuit they rapidly overtake and distance their Triangular
competitors.

Only a few of the Polygonal Class fail to pass the Final Test or
Leaving Examination at the University.  The condition of the
unsuccessful minority is truly pitiable.  Rejected from the higher
class, they are also despised by the lower.  They have neither the
matured and systematically trained powers of the Polygonal Bachelors
and Masters of Arts, nor yet the native precocity and mercurial
versatility of the youthful Tradesman.  The professions, the public
services, are closed against them, and though in most States they are
not actually debarred from marriage, yet they have the greatest
difficulty in forming suitable alliances, as experience shews that the
offspring of such unfortunate and ill-endowed parents is generally
itself unfortunate, if not positively Irregular.

It is from these specimens of the refuse of our Nobility that the great
Tumults and Seditions of past ages have generally derived their
leaders; and so great is the mischief thence arising that an increasing
minority of our more progressive Statesmen are of opinion that true
mercy would dictate their entire suppression, by enacting that all who
fail to pass the Final Examination of the University should be either
imprisoned for life, or extinguished by a painless death.

But I find myself digressing into the subject of Irregularities, a
matter of such vital interest that it demands a separate section.





7
  Concerning Irregular Figures


Throughout the previous pages I have been assuming--what perhaps should
have been laid down at the beginning as a distinct and fundamental
proposition--that every human being in Flatland is a Regular Figure,
that is to say of regular construction.  By this I mean that a Woman
must not only be a line, but a straight line; that an Artisan or
Soldier must have two of his sides equal; that Tradesmen must have
three sides equal; Lawyers (of which class I am a humble member), four
sides equal, and, generally, that in every Polygon, all the sides must
be equal.

The sizes of the sides would of course depend upon the age of the
individual.  A Female at birth would be about an inch long, while a
tall adult Woman might extend to a foot.  As to the Males of every
class, it may be roughly said that the length of an adult's size, when
added together, is two feet or a little more.  But the size of our
sides is not under consideration.  I am speaking of the EQUALITY of
sides, and it does not need much reflection to see that the whole of
the social life in Flatland rests upon the fundamental fact that Nature
wills all Figures to have their sides equal.

If our sides were unequal our angles might be unequal.  Instead of its
being sufficient to feel, or estimate by sight, a single angle in order
to determine the form of an individual, it would be necessary to
ascertain each angle by the experiment of Feeling.  But life would be
too short for such a tedious groping.  The whole science and art of
Sight Recognition would at once perish; Feeling, so far as it is an
art, would not long survive; intercourse would become perilous or
impossible; there would be an end to all confidence, all forethought;
no one would be safe in making the most simple social arrangements; in
a word, civilization might relapse into barbarism.

Am I going too fast to carry my Readers with me to these obvious
conclusions?  Surely a moment's reflection, and a single instance from
common life, must convince every one that our social system is based
upon Regularity, or Equality of Angles.  You meet, for example, two or
three Tradesmen in the street, whom your recognize at once to be
Tradesman by a glance at their angles and rapidly bedimmed sides, and
you ask them to step into your house to lunch.  This you do at present
with perfect confidence, because everyone knows to an inch or two the
area occupied by an adult Triangle: but imagine that your Tradesman
drags behind his regular and respectable vertex, a parallelogram of
twelve or thirteen inches in diagonal:--what are you to do with such a
monster sticking fast in your house door?

But I am insulting the intelligence of my Readers by accumulating
details which must be patent to everyone who enjoys the advantages of a
Residence in Spaceland.  Obviously the measurements of a single angle
would no longer be sufficient under such portentous circumstances;
one's whole life would be taken up in feeling or surveying the
perimeter of one's acquaintances.  Already the difficulties of avoiding
a collision in a crowd are enough to tax the sagacity of even a
well-educated Square; but if no one could calculate the Regularity of a
single figure in the company, all would be chaos and confusion, and the
slightest panic would cause serious injuries, or--if there happened to
be any Women or Soldiers present--perhaps considerable loss of life.

Expediency therefore concurs with Nature in stamping the seal of its
approval upon Regularity of conformation:  nor has the Law been
backward in seconding their efforts.  "Irregularity of Figure" means
with us the same as, or more than, a combination of moral obliquity and
criminality with you, and is treated accordingly.  There are not
wanting, it is true, some promulgators of paradoxes who maintain that
there is no necessary connection between geometrical and moral
Irregularity.  "The Irregular," they say, "is from his birth scouted by
his own parents, derided by his brothers and sisters, neglected by the
domestics, scorned and suspected by society, and excluded from all
posts of responsibility, trust, and useful activity.  His every
movement is jealously watched by the police till he comes of age and
presents himself for inspection; then he is either destroyed, if he is
found to exceed the fixed margin of deviation, at an uninteresting
occupation for a miserable stipend; obliged to live and board at the
office, and to take even his vacation under close supervision; what
wonder that human nature, even in the best and purest, is embittered
and perverted by such surroundings!"

All this very plausible reasoning does not convince me, as it has not
convinced the wisest of our Statesmen, that our ancestors erred in
laying it down as an axiom of policy that the toleration of
Irregularity is incompatible with the safety of the State.  Doubtless,
the life of an Irregular is hard; but the interests of the Greater
Number require that it shall be hard.  If a man with a triangular front
and a polygonal back were allowed to exist and to propagate a still
more Irregular posterity, what would become of the arts of life?  Are
the houses and doors and churches in Flatland to be altered in order to
accommodate such monsters?  Are our ticket-collectors to be required to
measure every man's perimeter before they allow him to enter a theatre,
or to take his place in a lecture room?  Is an Irregular to be exempted
from the militia?  And if not, how is he to be prevented from carrying
desolation into the ranks of his comrades?  Again, what irresistible
temptations to fraudulent impostures must needs beset such a creature!
How easy for him to enter a shop with his polygonal front foremost, and
to order goods to any extent from a confiding tradesman!  Let the
advocates of a falsely called Philanthropy plead as they may for the
abrogation of the Irregular Penal Laws, I for my part have never known
an Irregular who was not also what Nature evidently intended him to
be--a hypocrite, a misanthropist, and, up to the limits of his power, a
perpetrator of all manner of mischief.

Not that I should be disposed to recommend (at present) the extreme
measures adopted by some States, where an infant whose angle deviates
by half a degree from the correct angularity is summarily destroyed at
birth. Some of our highest and ablest men, men of real genius, have
during their earliest days laboured under deviations as great as, or
even greater than forty-five minutes: and the loss of their precious
lives would have been an irreparable injury to the State.  The art of
healing also has achieved some of its most glorious triumphs in the
compressions, extensions, trepannings, colligations, and other surgical
or diaetetic operations by which Irregularity has been partly or wholly
cured.  Advocating therefore a VIA MEDIA, I would lay down no fixed or
absolute line of demarcation; but at the period when the frame is just
beginning to set, and when the Medical Board has reported that recovery
is improbably, I would suggest that the Irregular offspring be
painlessly and mercifully consumed.




8
  Of the Ancient Practice of Painting


If my Readers have followed me with any attention up to this point,
they will not be surprised to hear that life is somewhat dull in
Flatland.  I do not, of course, mean that there are not battles,
conspiracies, tumults, factions, and all those other phenomena which
are supposed to make History interesting; nor would I deny that the
strange mixture of the problems of life and the problems of
Mathematics, continually inducing conjecture and giving an opportunity
of immediate verification, imparts to our existence a zest which you in
Spaceland can hardly comprehend.  I speak now from the aesthetic and
artistic point of view when I say that life with us is dull;
aesthetically and artistically, very dull indeed.

How can it be otherwise, when all one's prospect, all one's landscapes,
historical pieces, portraits, flowers, still life, are nothing but a
single line, with no varieties except degrees of brightness and
obscurity?

It was not always thus.  Colour, if Tradition speaks the truth, once
for the space of half a dozen centuries or more, threw a transient
splendour over the lives of our ancestors in the remotest ages.  Some
private individual--a Pentagon whose name is variously reported--having
casually discovered the constituents of the simpler colours and a
rudimentary method of painting, is said to have begun by decorating
first his house, then his slaves, then his Father, his Sons, and
Grandsons, lastly himself.  The convenience as well as the beauty of
the results commended themselves to all.  Wherever Chromatistes,--for
by that name the most trustworthy authorities concur in calling
him,--turned his variegated frame, there he at once excited attention,
and attracted respect.  No one now needed to "feel" him; no one mistook
his front for his back; all his movements were readily ascertained by
his neighbours without the slightest strain on their powers of
calculation; no one jostled him, or failed to make way for him; his
voice was saved the labour of that exhausting utterance by which we
colourless Squares and Pentagons are often forced to proclaim our
individuality when we move amid a crowd of ignorant Isosceles.

The fashion spread like wildfire.  Before a week was over, every Square
and Triangle in the district had copied the example of Chromatistes,
and only a few of the more conservative Pentagons still held out.  A
month or two found even the Dodecagons infected with the innovation.  A
year had not elapsed before the habit had spread to all but the very
highest of the Nobility.  Needless to say, the custom soon made its way
from the district of Chromatistes to surrounding regions; and within
two generations no one in all Flatland was colourless except the Women
and the Priests.

Here Nature herself appeared to erect a barrier, and to plead against
extending the innovations to these two classes.  Many-sidedness was
almost essential as a pretext for the Innovators.  "Distinction of
sides is intended by Nature to imply distinction of colours"--such was
the sophism which in those days flew from mouth to mouth, converting
whole towns at a time to a new culture.  But manifestly to our Priests
and Women this adage did not apply.  The latter had only one side, and
therefore--plurally and pedantically speaking--NO SIDES.  The
former--if at least they would assert their claim to be readily and
truly Circles, and not mere high-class Polygons, with an infinitely
large number of infinitesimally small sides--were in the habit of
boasting (what Women confessed and deplored) that they also had no
sides, being blessed with a perimeter of only one line, or, in other
words, a Circumference.  Hence it came to pass that these two Classes
could see no force in the so-called axiom about "Distinction of Sides
implying Distinction of Colour;" and when all others had succumbed to
the fascinations of corporal decoration, the Priests and the Women
alone still remained pure from the pollution of paint.

Immoral, licentious, anarchical, unscientific--call them by what names
you will--yet, from an aesthetic point of view, those ancient days of
the Colour Revolt were the glorious childhood of Art in Flatland--a
childhood, alas, that never ripened into manhood, nor even reached the
blossom of youth.  To live then in itself a delight, because living
implied seeing.  Even at a small party, the company was a pleasure to
behold; the richly varied hues of the assembly in a church or theatre
are said to have more than once proved too distracting from our
greatest teachers and actors; but most ravishing of all is said to have
been the unspeakable magnificence of a military review.

The sight of a line of battle of twenty thousand Isosceles suddenly
facing about, and exchanging the sombre black of their bases for the
orange of the two sides including their acute angle; the militia of the
Equilateral Triangles tricoloured in red, white, and blue; the mauve,
ultra-marine, gamboge, and burnt umber of the Square artillerymen
rapidly rotating near their vermillion guns; the dashing and flashing
of the five-coloured and six-coloured Pentagons and Hexagons careering
across the field in their offices of surgeons, geometricians and
aides-de-camp--all these may well have been sufficient to render
credible the famous story how an illustrious Circle, overcome by the
artistic beauty of the forces under his command, threw aside his
marshal's baton and his royal crown, exclaiming that he henceforth
exchanged them for the artist's pencil.  How great and glorious the
sensuous development of these days must have been is in part indicated
by the very language and vocabulary of the period.  The commonest
utterances of the commonest citizens in the time of the Colour Revolt
seem to have been suffused with a richer tinge of word or thought; and
to that era we are even now indebted for our finest poetry and for
whatever rhythm still remains in the more scientific utterance of those
modern days.




9
  Of the Universal Colour Bill


But meanwhile the intellectual Arts were fast decaying.

The Art of Sight Recognition, being no longer needed, was no longer
practised; and the studies of Geometry, Statics, Kinetics, and other
kindred subjects, came soon to be considered superfluous, and fell into
disrespect and neglect even at our University.  The inferior Art of
Feeling speedily experienced the same fate at our Elementary Schools.
Then the Isosceles classes, asserting that the Specimens were no longer
used nor needed, and refusing to pay the customary tribute from the
Criminal classes to the service of Education, waxed daily more numerous
and more insolent on the strength of their immunity from the old burden
which had formerly exercised the twofold wholesome effect of at once
taming their brutal nature and thinning their excessive numbers.

Year by year the Soldiers and Artisans began more vehemently to
assert--and with increasing truth--that there was no great difference
between them and the very highest class of Polygons, now that they were
raised to an equality with the latter, and enabled to grapple with all
the difficulties and solve all the problems of life, whether Statical
or Kinetical, by the simple process of Colour Recognition.  Not content
with the natural neglect into which Sight Recognition was falling, they
began boldly to demand the legal prohibition of all "monopolizing and
aristocratic Arts" and the consequent abolition of all endowments for
the studies of Sight Recognition, Mathematics, and Feeling.  Soon, they
began to insist that inasmuch as Colour, which was a second Nature, had
destroyed the need of aristocratic distinctions, the Law should follow
in the same path, and that henceforth all individuals and all classes
should be recognized as absolutely equal and entitled to equal rights.

Finding the higher Orders wavering and undecided, the leaders of the
Revolution advanced still further in their requirements, and at last
demanded that all classes alike, the Priests and the Women not
excepted, should do homage to Colour by submitting to be painted.  When
it was objected that Priests and Women had no sides, they retorted that
Nature and Expediency concurred in dictating that the front half of
every human being (that is to say, the half containing his eye and
mouth) should be distinguishable from his hinder half.  They therefore
brought before a general and extraordinary Assembly of all the States
of Flatland a Bill proposing that in every Woman the half containing
the eye and mouth should be coloured red, and the other half green.
The Priests were to be painted in the same way, red being applied to
that semicircle in which the eye and mouth formed the middle point;
while the other or hinder semicircle was to be coloured green.

There was no little cunning in this proposal, which indeed emanated not
from any Isosceles--for no being so degraded would have angularity
enough to appreciate, much less to devise, such a model of
state-craft--but from an Irregular Circle who, instead of being
destroyed in his childhood, was reserved by a foolish indulgence to
bring desolation on his country and destruction on myriads of followers.

On the one hand the proposition was calculated to bring the Women in
all classes over to the side of the Chromatic Innovation.  For by
assigning to the Women the same two colours as were assigned to the
Priests, the Revolutionists thereby ensured that, in certain positions,
every Woman would appear as a Priest, and be treated with corresponding
respect and deference--a prospect that could not fail to attract the
Female Sex in a mass.

But by some of my Readers the possibility of the identical appearance
of Priests and Women, under a new Legislation, may not be recognized;
if so, a word or two will make it obvious.

Imagine a woman duly decorated, according to the new Code; with the
front half (i.e., the half containing the eye and mouth) red, and with
the hinder half green.  Look at her from one side.  Obviously you will
see a straight line, HALF RED, HALF GREEN.

Now imagine a Priest, whose mouth is at M, and whose front semicircle
(AMB) is consequently coloured red, while his hinder semicircle is
green; so that the diameter AB divides the green from the red.  If you
contemplate the Great Man so as to have your eye in the same straight
line as his dividing diameter (AB), what you will see will be a
straight line (CBD), of which ONE HALF (CB) WILL BE RED, AND THE OTHER
(BD) GREEN.  The whole line (CD) will be rather shorter perhaps than
that of a full-sized Woman, and will shade off more rapidly towards its
extremities; but the identity of the colours would give you an
immediate impression of identity in Class, making you neglectful of
other details.  Bear in mind the decay of Sight Recognition which
threatened society at the time of the Colour revolt; add too the
certainty that Woman would speedily learn to shade off their
extremities so as to imitate the Circles; it must then be surely
obvious to you, my dear Reader, that the Colour Bill placed us under a
great danger of confounding a Priest with a young Woman.

How attractive this prospect must have been to the Frail Sex may
readily be imagined.  They anticipated with delight the confusion that
would ensue.  At home they might hear political and ecclesiastical
secrets intended not for them but for their husbands and brothers, and
might even issue some commands in the name of a priestly Circle; out of
doors the striking combination of red and green without addition of any
other colours, would be sure to lead the common people into endless
mistakes, and the Woman would gain whatever the Circles lost, in the
deference of the passers by.  As for the scandal that would befall the
Circular Class if the frivolous and unseemly conduct of the Women were
imputed to them, and as to the consequent subversion of the
Constitution, the Female Sex could not be expected to give a thought to
these considerations.  Even in the households of the Circles, the Women
were all in favour of the Universal Colour Bill.

The second object aimed at by the Bill was the gradual demoralization
of the Circles themselves.  In the general intellectual decay they
still preserved their pristine clearness and strength of understanding.
From their earliest childhood, familiarized in their Circular
households with the total absence of Colour, the Nobles alone preserved
the Sacred Art of Sight Recognition, with all the advantages that
result from that admirable training of the intellect.  Hence, up to the
date of the introduction of the Universal Colour Bill, the Circles had
not only held their own, but even increased their lead of the other
classes by abstinence from the popular fashion.

Now therefore the artful Irregular whom I described above as the real
author of this diabolical Bill, determined at one blow to lower the
status of the Hierarchy by forcing them to submit to the pollution of
Colour, and at the same time to destroy their domestic opportunities of
training in the Art of Sight Recognition, so as to enfeeble their
intellects by depriving them of their pure and colourless homes.  Once
subjected to the chromatic taint, every parental and every childish
Circle would demoralize each other.  Only in discerning between the
Father and the Mother would the Circular infant find problems for the
exercise of his understanding--problems too often likely to be
corrupted by maternal impostures with the result of shaking the child's
faith in all logical conclusions.  Thus by degrees the intellectual
lustre of the Priestly Order would wane, and the road would then lie
open for a total destruction of all Aristocratic Legislature and for
the subversion of our Privileged Classes.




10
  Of the Suppression of the Chromatic Sedition


The agitation for the Universal Colour Bill continued for three years;
and up to the last moment of that period it seemed as though Anarchy
were destined to triumph.

A whole army of Polygons, who turned out to fight as private soldiers,
was utterly annihilated by a superior force of Isosceles Triangles--the
Squares and Pentagons meanwhile remaining neutral.

Worse than all, some of the ablest Circles fell a prey to conjugal
fury.  Infuriated by political animosity, the wives in many a noble
household wearied their lords with prayers to give up their opposition
to the Colour Bill; and some, finding their entreaties fruitless, fell
on and slaughtered their innocent children and husband, perishing
themselves in the act of carnage.  It is recorded that during that
triennial agitation no less than twenty-three Circles perished in
domestic discord.

Great indeed was the peril.  It seemed as though the Priests had no
choice between submission and extermination; when suddenly the course
of events was completely changed by one of those picturesque incidents
which Statesmen ought never to neglect, often to anticipate, and
sometimes perhaps to originate, because of the absurdly
disproportionate power with which they appeal to the sympathies of the
populace.

It happened that an Isosceles of a low type, with a brain little if at
all above four degrees--accidentally dabbling in the colours of some
Tradesman whose shop he had plundered--painted himself, or caused
himself to be painted (for the story varies) with the twelve colours of
a Dodecagon.  Going into the Market Place he accosted in a feigned
voice a maiden, the orphan daughter of a noble Polygon, whose affection
in former days he had sought in vain; and by a series of
deceptions--aided, on the one side, by a string of lucky accidents too
long to relate, and, on the other, by an almost inconceivable fatuity
and neglect of ordinary precautions on the part of the relations of the
bride--he succeeded in consummating the marriage.  The unhappy girl
committed suicide on discovering the fraud to which she had been
subjected.

When the news of this catastrophe spread from State to State the minds
of the Women were violently agitated.  Sympathy with the miserable
victim and anticipations of similar deceptions for themselves, their
sisters, and their daughters, made them now regard the Colour Bill in
an entirely new aspect.  Not a few openly avowed themselves converted
to antagonism; the rest needed only a slight stimulus to make a similar
avowal.  Seizing this favourable opportunity, the Circles hastily
convened an extraordinary Assembly of the States; and besides the usual
guard of Convicts, they secured the attendance of a large number of
reactionary Women.

Amidst an unprecedented concourse, the Chief Circle of those days--by
name Pantocyclus--arose to find himself hissed and hooted by a hundred
and twenty thousand Isosceles.  But he secured silence by declaring
that henceforth the Circles would enter on a policy of Concession;
yielding to the wishes of the majority, they would accept the Colour
Bill.  The uproar being at once converted to applause, he invited
Chromatistes, the leader of the Sedition, into the centre of the hall,
to receive in the name of his followers the submission of the
Hierarchy.  Then followed a speech, a masterpiece of rhetoric, which
occupied nearly a day in the delivery, and to which no summary can do
justice.

With a grave appearance of impartiality he declared that as they were
now finally committing themselves to Reform or Innovation, it was
desirable that they should take one last view of the perimeter of the
whole subject, its defects as well as its advantages.  Gradually
introduction the mention of the dangers to the Tradesmen, the
Professional Classes and the Gentlemen, he silenced the rising murmurs
of the Isosceles by reminding them that, in spite of all these defects,
he was willing to accept the Bill if it was approved by the majority.
But it was manifest that all, except the Isosceles, were moved by his
words and were either neutral or averse to the Bill.

Turning now to the Workmen he asserted that their interests must not be
neglected, and that, if they intended to accept the Colour Bill, they
ought at least to do so with full view of the consequences.  Many of
them, he said, were on the point of being admitted to the class of the
Regular Triangles; others anticipated for their children a distinction
they could not hope for themselves.  That honourable ambition would not
have to be sacrificed.  With the universal adoption of Colour, all
distinctions would cease; Regularity would be confused with
Irregularity; development would give place to retrogression; the
Workman would in a few generations be degraded to the level of the
Military, or even the Convict Class; political power would be in the
hands of the greatest number, that is to say the Criminal Classes, who
were already more numerous than the Workmen, and would soon out-number
all the other Classes put together when the usual Compensative Laws of
Nature were violated.

A subdued murmur of assent ran through the ranks of the Artisans, and
Chromatistes, in alarm, attempted to step forward and address them.
But he found himself encompassed with guards and forced to remain
silent while the Chief Circle in a few impassioned words made a final
appeal to the Women, exclaiming that, if the Colour Bill passed, no
marriage would henceforth be safe, no woman's honour secure; fraud,
deception, hypocrisy would pervade every household; domestic bliss
would share the fate of the Constitution and pass to speedy perdition.
"Sooner than this," he cried, "come death."

At these words, which were the preconcerted signal for action, the
Isosceles Convicts fell on and transfixed the wretched Chromatistes;
the Regular Classes, opening their ranks, made way for a band of Women
who, under direction of the Circles, moved back foremost, invisibly and
unerringly upon the unconscious soldiers; the Artisans, imitating the
example of their betters, also opened their ranks.  Meantime bands of
Convicts occupied every entrance with an impenetrable phalanx.

The battle, or rather carnage, was of short duration.  Under the
skillful generalship of the Circles almost every Woman's charge was
fatal and very many extracted their sting uninjured, ready for a second
slaughter.  But no second blow was needed; the rabble of the Isosceles
did the rest of the business for themselves.  Surprised, leader-less,
attacked in front by invisible foes, and finding egress cut off by the
Convicts behind them, they at once--after their manner--lost all
presence of mind, and raised the cry of "treachery."  This sealed their
fate.  Every Isosceles now saw and felt a foe in every other.  In half
an hour not one of that vast multitude was living; and the fragments of
seven score thousand of the Criminal Class slain by one another's
angles attested the triumph of Order.

The Circles delayed not to push their victory to the uttermost.  The
Working Men they spared but decimated.  The Militia of the Equilaterals
was at once called out, and every Triangle suspected of Irregularity on
reasonable grounds, was destroyed by Court Martial, without the
formality of exact measurement by the Social Board.  The homes of the
Military and Artisan classes were inspected in a course of visitation
extending through upwards of a year; and during that period every town,
village, and hamlet was systematically purged of that excess of the
lower orders which had been brought about by the neglect to pay the
tribute of Criminals to the Schools and University, and by the
violation of other natural Laws of the Constitution of Flatland.  Thus
the balance of classes was again restored.

Needless to say that henceforth the use of Colour was abolished, and
its possession prohibited.  Even the utterance of any word denoting
Colour, except by the Circles or by qualified scientific teachers, was
punished by a severe penalty.  Only at our University in some of the
very highest and most esoteric classes--which I myself have never been
privileged to attend--it is understood that the sparing use of Colour
is still sanctioned for the purpose of illustrating some of the deeper
problems of mathematics.  But of this I can only speak from hearsay.

Elsewhere in Flatland, Colour is now non-existent.  The art of making
it is known to only one living person, the Chief Circle for the time
being; and by him it is handed down on his death-bed to none but his
Successor.  One manufactory alone produces it; and, lest the secret
should be betrayed, the Workmen are annually consumed, and fresh ones
introduced.  So great is the terror with which even now our Aristocracy
looks back to the far-distant days of the agitation for the Universal
Colour Bill.




11
  Concerning our Priests


It is high time that I should pass from these brief and discursive
notes about things in Flatland to the central event of this book, my
initiation into the mysteries of Space.  THAT is my subject; all that
has gone before is merely preface.

For this reason I must omit many matters of which the explanation would
not, I flatter myself, be without interest for my Readers: as for
example, our method of propelling and stopping ourselves, although
destitute of feet; the means by which we give fixity to structures of
wood, stone, or brick, although of course we have no hands, nor can we
lay foundations as you can, nor avail ourselves of the lateral pressure
of the earth; the manner in which the rain originates in the intervals
between our various zones, so that the northern regions do not
intercept the moisture falling on the southern; the nature of our hills
and mines, our trees and vegetables, our seasons and harvests; our
Alphabet and method of writing, adapted to our linear tablets; these
and a hundred other details of our physical existence I must pass over,
nor do I mention them now except to indicate to my readers that their
omission proceeds not from forgetfulness on the part of the author, but
from his regard for the time of the Reader.

Yet before I proceed to my legitimate subject some few final remarks
will no doubt be expected by my Readers upon these pillars and
mainstays of the Constitution of Flatland, the controllers of our
conduct and shapers of our destiny, the objects of universal homage and
almost of adoration:  need I say that I mean our Circles or Priests?

When I call them Priests, let me not be understood as meaning no more
than the term denotes with you.  With us, our Priests are
Administrators of all Business, Art, and Science; Directors of Trade,
Commerce, Generalship, Architecture, Engineering, Education,
Statesmanship, Legislature, Morality, Theology; doing nothing
themselves, they are the Causes of everything worth doing, that is done
by others.

Although popularly everyone called a Circle is deemed a Circle, yet
among the better educated Classes it is known that no Circle is really
a Circle, but only a Polygon with a very large number of very small
sides.  As the number of the sides increases, a Polygon approximates to
a Circle; and, when the number is very great indeed, say for example
three or four hundred, it is extremely difficult for the most delicate
touch to feel any polygonal angles.  Let me say rather it WOULD be
difficult:  for, as I have shown above, Recognition by Feeling is
unknown among the highest society, and to FEEL a Circle would be
considered a most audacious insult.  This habit of abstention from
Feeling in the best society enables a Circle the more easily to sustain
the veil of mystery in which, from his earliest years, he is wont to
enwrap the exact nature of his Perimeter or Circumference.  Three feet
being the average Perimeter it follows that, in a Polygon of three
hundred sides each side will be no more than the hundredth part of a
foot in length, or little more than the tenth part of an inch; and in a
Polygon of six or seven hundred sides the sides are little larger than
the diameter of a Spaceland pin-head.  It is always assumed, by
courtesy, that the Chief Circle for the time being has ten thousand
sides.

The ascent of the posterity of the Circles in the social scale is not
restricted, as it is among the lower Regular classes, by the Law of
Nature which limits the increase of sides to one in each generation.
If it were so, the number of sides in the Circle would be a mere
question of pedigree and arithmetic, and the four hundred and
ninety-seventh descendant of an Equilateral Triangle would necessarily
be a polygon with five hundred sides.  But this is not the case.
Nature's Law prescribes two antagonistic decrees affecting Circular
propagation; first, that as the race climbs higher in the scale of
development, so development shall proceed at an accelerated pace;
second, that in the same proportion, the race shall become less
fertile.  Consequently in the home of a Polygon of four or five hundred
sides it is rare to find a son; more than one is never seen.  On the
other hand the son of a five-hundred-sided Polygon has been known to
possess five hundred and fifty, or even six hundred sides.

Art also steps in to help the process of higher Evolution.  Our
physicians have discovered that the small and tender sides of an infant
Polygon of the higher class can be fractured, and his whole frame
re-set, with such exactness that a Polygon of two or three hundred
sides sometimes--by no means always, for the process is attended with
serious risk--but sometimes overleaps two or three hundred generations,
and as it were double at a stroke, the number of his progenitors and
the nobility of his descent.

Many a promising child is sacrificed in this way.  Scarcely one out of
ten survives.  Yet so strong is the parental ambition among those
Polygons who are, as it were, on the fringe of the Circular class, that
it is very rare to find the Nobleman of that position in society, who
has neglected to place his first-born in the Circular Neo-Therapeutic
Gymnasium before he has attained the age of a month.

One year determines success or failure.  At the end of that time the
child has, in all probability, added one more to the tombstones that
crowd the Neo-Therapeutic Cemetery; but on rare occasional a glad
procession bears back the little one to his exultant parents, no longer
a Polygon, but a Circle, at least by courtesy:  and a single instance
of so blessed a result induces multitudes of Polygonal parents to
submit to similar domestic sacrifice, which have a dissimilar issue.



12
  Of the Doctrine of our Priests


As to the doctrine of the Circles it may briefly be summed up in a
single maxim, "Attend to your Configuration."  Whether political,
ecclesiastical, or moral, all their teaching has for its object the
improvement of individual and collective Configuration--with special
reference of course to the Configuration of the Circles, to which all
other objects are subordinated.

It is the merit of the Circles that they have effectually suppressed
those ancient heresies which led men to waste energy and sympathy in
the vain belief that conduct depends upon will, effort, training,
encouragement, praise, or anything else but Configuration.  It was
Pantocyclus--the illustrious Circle mentioned above, as the queller of
the Colour Revolt--who first convinced mankind that Configuration makes
the man; that if, for example, you are born an Isosceles with two
uneven sides, you will assuredly go wrong unless you have them made
even--for which purpose you must go to the Isosceles Hospital;
similarly, if you are a Triangle, or Square, or even a Polygon, born
with any Irregularity, you must be taken to one of the Regular
Hospitals to have your disease cured; otherwise you will end your days
in the State Prison or by the angle of the State Executioner.

All faults or defects, from the slightest misconduct to the most
flagitious crime, Pantocyclus attributed to some deviation from perfect
Regularity in the bodily figure, caused perhaps (if not congenital) by
some collision in a crowd; by neglect to take exercise, or by taking
too much of it; or even by a sudden change of temperature, resulting in
a shrinkage or expansion in some too susceptible part of the frame.
Therefore, concluded that illustrious Philosopher, neither good conduct
nor bad conduct is a fit subject, in any sober estimation, for either
praise or blame.  For why should you praise, for example, the integrity
of a Square who faithfully defends the interests of his client, when
you ought in reality rather to admire the exact precision of his right
angles?  Or again, why blame a lying, thievish Isosceles, when you
ought rather to deplore the incurable inequality of his sides?

Theoretically, this doctrine is unquestionable; but it has practical
drawbacks.  In dealing with an Isosceles, if a rascal pleads that he
cannot help stealing because of his unevenness, you reply that for that
very reason, because he cannot help being a nuisance to his neighbours,
you, the Magistrate, cannot help sentencing him to be consumed--and
there's an end of the matter.  But in little domestic difficulties,
when the penalty of consumption, or death, is out of the question, this
theory of Configuration sometimes comes in awkwardly; and I must
confess that occasionally when one of my own Hexagonal Grandsons pleads
as an excuse for his disobedience that a sudden change of temperature
has been too much for his Perimeter, and that I ought to lay the blame
not on him but on his Configuration, which can only be strengthened by
abundance of the choicest sweetmeats, I neither see my way logically to
reject, nor practically to accept, his conclusions.

For my own part, I find it best to assume that a good sound scolding or
castigation has some latent and strengthening influence on my
Grandson's Configuration; though I own that I have no grounds for
thinking so.  At all events I am not alone in my way of extricating
myself from this dilemma; for I find that many of the highest Circles,
sitting as Judges in law courts, use praise and blame towards Regular
and Irregular Figures; and in their homes I know by experience that,
when scolding their children, they speak about "right" and "wrong" as
vehemently and passionately as if they believe that these names
represented real existence, and that a human Figure is really capable
of choosing between them.

Constantly carrying out their policy of making Configuration the
leading idea in every mind, the Circles reverse the nature of that
Commandment which in Spaceland regulates the relations between parents
and children.  With you, children are taught to honour their parents;
with us--next to the Circles, who are the chief object of universal
homage--a man is taught to honour his Grandson, if he has one; or, if
not, his Son.  By "honour," however, is by no means mean "indulgence,"
but a reverent regard for their highest interests:  and the Circles
teach that the duty of fathers is to subordinate their own interests to
those of posterity, thereby advancing the welfare of the whole State as
well as that of their own immediate descendants.

The weak point in the system of the Circles--if a humble Square may
venture to speak of anything Circular as containing any element of
weakness--appears to me to be found in their relations with Women.

As it is of the utmost importance for Society that Irregular births
should be discouraged, it follows that no Woman who has any
Irregularities in her ancestry is a fit partner for one who desires
that his posterity should rise by regular degrees in the social scale.

Now the Irregularity of a Male is a matter of measurement; but as all
Women are straight, and therefore visibly Regular so to speak, one has
to devise some other means of ascertaining what I may call their
invisible Irregularity, that is to say their potential Irregularities
as regards possible offspring.  This is effected by carefully-kept
pedigrees, which are preserved and supervised by the State; and without
a certified pedigree no Woman is allowed to marry.

Now it might have been supposed the a Circle--proud of his ancestry and
regardful for a posterity which might possibly issue hereafter in a
Chief Circle--would be more careful than any other to choose a wife who
had no blot on her escutcheon.  But it is not so.  The care in choosing
a Regular wife appears to diminish as one rises in the social scale.
Nothing would induce an aspiring Isosceles, who has hopes of generating
an Equilateral Son, to take a wife who reckoned a single Irregularity
among her Ancestors; a Square or Pentagon, who is confident that his
family is steadily on the rise, does not inquire above the
five-hundredth generation; a Hexagon or Dodecagon is even more careless
of the wife's pedigree; but a Circle has been known deliberately to
take a wife who has had an Irregular Great-Grandfather, and all because
of some slight superiority of lustre, or because of the charms of a low
voice--which, with us, even more than with you, is thought "an
excellent thing in a Woman."

Such ill-judged marriages are, as might be expected, barren, if they do
not result in positive Irregularity or in diminution of sides; but none
of these evils have hitherto provided sufficiently deterrent.  The loss
of a few sides in a highly-developed Polygon is not easily noticed, and
is sometimes compensated by a successful operation in the
Neo-Therapeutic Gymnasium, as I have described above; and the Circles
are too much disposed to acquiesce in infecundity as a law of the
superior development.  Yet, if this evil be not arrested, the gradual
diminution of the Circular class may soon become more rapid, and the
time may not be far distant when, the race being no longer able to
produce a Chief Circle, the Constitution of Flatland must fall.

One other word of warning suggest itself to me, though I cannot so
easily mention a remedy; and this also refers to our relations with
Women.  About three hundred years ago, it was decreed by the Chief
Circle that, since women are deficient in Reason but abundant in
Emotion, they ought no longer to be treated as rational, nor receive
any mental education.  The consequence was that they were no longer
taught to read, nor even to master Arithmetic enough to enable them to
count the angles of their husband or children; and hence they sensibly
declined during each generation in intellectual power.  And this system
of female non-education or quietism still prevails.

My fear is that, with the best intentions, this policy has been carried
so far as to react injuriously on the Male Sex.

For the consequence is that, as things now are, we Males have to lead a
kind of bi-lingual, and I may almost say bimental, existence.  With
Women, we speak of "love," "duty," "right," "wrong," "pity," "hope,"
and other irrational and emotional conceptions, which have no
existence, and the fiction of which has no object except to control
feminine exuberances; but among ourselves, and in our books, we have an
entirely different vocabulary and I may also say, idiom.  "Love" them
becomes "the anticipation of benefits"; "duty" becomes "necessity" or
"fitness"; and other words are correspondingly transmuted.  Moreover,
among Women, we use language implying the utmost deference for their
Sex; and they fully believe that the Chief Circle Himself is not more
devoutly adored by us than they are:  but behind their backs they are
both regarded and spoken of--by all but the very young--as being little
better than "mindless organisms."

Our Theology also in the Women's chambers is entirely different from
our Theology elsewhere.

Now my humble fear is that this double training, in language as well as
in thought, imposes somewhat too heavy a burden upon the young,
especially when, at the age of three years old, they are taken from the
maternal care and taught to unlearn the old language--except for the
purpose of repeating it in the presence of the Mothers and Nurses--and
to learn the vocabulary and idiom of science.  Already methinks I
discern a weakness in the grasp of mathematical truth at the present
time as compared with the more robust intellect of our ancestors three
hundred years ago.  I say nothing of the possible danger if a Woman
should ever surreptitiously learn to read and convey to her Sex the
result of her perusal of a single popular volume; nor of the
possibility that the indiscretion or disobedience of some infant Male
might reveal to a Mother the secrets of the logical dialect.  On the
simple ground of the enfeebling of the male intellect, I rest this
humble appeal to the highest Authorities to reconsider the regulations
of Female education.




II


OTHER WORLDS


"O brave new worlds, That have such people in them!"




13
How I had a Vision of Lineland


It was the last day but one of the 1999th year of our era, and the
first day of the Long Vacation.  Having amused myself till a late hour
with my favourite recreation of Geometry, I had retired to rest with an
unsolved problem in my mind.  In the night I had a dream.

I saw before me a vast multitude of small Straight Lines (which I
naturally assumed to be Women) interspersed with other Beings still
smaller and of the nature of lustrous points--all moving to and fro in
one and the same Straight Line, and, as nearly as I could judge, with
the same velocity.

A noise of confused, multitudinous chirping or twittering issued from
them at intervals as long as they were moving; but sometimes they
ceased from motion, and then all was silence.

Approaching one of the largest of what I thought to be Women, I
accosted her, but received no answer.  A second and third appeal on my
part were equally ineffectual.  Losing patience at what appeared to me
intolerable rudeness, I brought my mouth to a position full in front of
her mouth so as to intercept her motion, and loudly repeated my
question, "Woman, what signifies this concourse, and this strange and
confused chirping, and this monotonous motion to and fro in one and the
same Straight Line?"

"I am no Woman," replied the small Line:  "I am the Monarch of the
world.  But thou, whence intrudest thou into my realm of Lineland?"
Receiving this abrupt reply, I begged pardon if I had in any way
startled or molested his Royal Highness; and describing myself as a
stranger I besought the King to give me some account of his dominions.
But I had the greatest possible difficulty in obtaining any information
on points that really interested me; for the Monarch could not refrain
from constantly assuming that whatever was familiar to him must also be
known to me and that I was simulating ignorance in jest.  However, by
preserving questions I elicited the following facts:

It seemed that this poor ignorant Monarch--as he called himself--was
persuaded that the Straight Line which he called his Kingdom, and in
which he passed his existence, constituted the whole of the world, and
indeed the whole of Space.  Not being able either to move or to see,
save in his Straight Line, he had no conception of anything out of it.
Though he had heard my voice when I first addressed him, the sounds had
come to him in a manner so contrary to his experience that he had made
no answer, "seeing no man," as he expressed it, "and hearing a voice as
it were from my own intestines."  Until the moment when I placed my
mouth in his World, he had neither seen me, nor heard anything except
confused sounds beating against, what I called his side, but what he
called his INSIDE or STOMACH; nor had he even now the least conception
of the region from which I had come.  Outside his World, or Line, all
was a blank to him; nay, not even a blank, for a blank implies Space;
say, rather, all was non-existent.

His subjects--of whom the small Lines were men and the Points
Women--were all alike confined in motion and eyesight to that single
Straight Line, which was their World.  It need scarcely be added that
the whole of their horizon was limited to a Point; nor could any one
ever see anything but a Point.  Man, woman, child, thing--each as a
Point to the eye of a Linelander.  Only by the sound of the voice could
sex or age be distinguished.  Moreover, as each individual occupied the
whole of the narrow path, so to speak, which constituted his Universe,
and no one could move to the right or left to make way for passers by,
it followed that no Linelander could ever pass another.  Once
neighbours, always neighbours.  Neighbourhood with them was like
marriage with us.  Neighbours remained neighbours till death did them
part.

Such a life, with all vision limited to a Point, and all motion to a
Straight Line, seemed to me inexpressibly dreary; and I was surprised
to note that vivacity and cheerfulness of the King.  Wondering whether
it was possible, amid circumstances so unfavourable to domestic
relations, to enjoy the pleasures of conjugal union, I hesitated for
some time to question his Royal Highness on so delicate a subject; but
at last I plunged into it by abruptly inquiring as to the health of his
family.  "My wives and children," he replied, "are well and happy."

Staggered at this answer--for in the immediate proximity of the Monarch
(as I had noted in my dream before I entered Lineland) there were none
but Men--I ventured to reply, "Pardon me, but I cannot imagine how your
Royal Highness can at any time either see or approach their Majesties,
when there at least half a dozen intervening individuals, whom you can
neither see through, nor pass by?  Is it possible that in Lineland
proximity is not necessary for marriage and for the generation of
children?"

"How can you ask so absurd a question?" replied the Monarch.  "If it
were indeed as you suggest, the Universe would soon be depopulated.
No, no; neighbourhood is needless for the union of hearts; and the
birth of children is too important a matter to have been allowed to
depend upon such an accident as proximity.  You cannot be ignorant of
this.  Yet since you are pleased to affect ignorance, I will instruct
you as if you were the veriest baby in Lineland.  Know, then, that
marriages are consummated by means of the faculty of sound and the
sense of hearing.

"You are of course aware that every Man has two mouths or voices--as
well as two eyes--a bass at one and a tenor at the other of his
extremities.  I should not mention this, but that I have been unable to
distinguish your tenor in the course of our conversation." I replied
that I had but one voice, and that I had not been aware that his Royal
Highness had two.  "That confirms my impression," said the King, "that
you are not a Man, but a feminine Monstrosity with a bass voice, and an
utterly uneducated ear.  But to continue.

"Nature having herself ordained that every Man should wed two wives--"
"Why two?" asked I.  "You carry your affected simplicity too far," he
cried.  "How can there be a completely harmonious union without the
combination of the Four in One, viz. the Bass and Tenor of the Man and
the Soprano and Contralto of the two Women?"  "But supposing," said I,
"that a man should prefer one wife or three?"  "It is impossible," he
said; "it is as inconceivable as that two and one should make five, or
that the human eye should see a Straight Line."  I would have
interrupted him; but he proceeded as follows:

"Once in the middle of each week a Law of Nature compels us to move to
and fro with a rhythmic motion of more than usual violence, which
continues for the time you would take to count a hundred and one.  In
the midst of this choral dance, at the fifty-first pulsation, the
inhabitants of the Universe pause in full career, and each individual
sends forth his richest, fullest, sweetest strain.  It is in this
decisive moment that all our marriages are made.  So exquisite is the
adaptation of Bass and Treble, of Tenor to Contralto, that oftentimes
the Loved Ones, though twenty thousand leagues away, recognize at once
the responsive note of their destined Lover; and, penetrating the
paltry obstacles of distance, Love unites the three.  The marriage in
that instance consummated results in a threefold Male and Female
offspring which takes its place in Lineland."

"What!  Always threefold?" said I.  "Must one wife then always have
twins?"

"Bass-voice Monstrosity! yes," replied the King.  "How else could the
balance of the Sexes be maintained, if two girls were not born for
every boy?  Would you ignore the very Alphabet of Nature?" He ceased,
speechless for fury; and some time elapsed before I could induce him to
resume his narrative.

"You will not, of course, suppose that every bachelor among us finds
his mates at the first wooing in this universal Marriage Chorus.  On
the contrary, the process is by most of us many times repeated.  Few
are the hearts whose happy lot is at once to recognize in each other's
voice the partner intended for them by Providence, and to fly into a
reciprocal and perfectly harmonious embrace.  With most of us the
courtship is of long duration.  The Wooer's voices may perhaps accord
with one of the future wives, but not with both; or not, at first, with
either; or the Soprano and Contralto may not quite harmonize.  In such
cases Nature has provided that every weekly Chorus shall bring the
three Lovers into closer harmony.  Each trial of voice, each fresh
discovery of discord, almost imperceptibly induces the less perfect to
modify his or her vocal utterance so as to approximate to the more
perfect.  And after many trials and many approximations, the result is
at last achieved.  There comes a day at last when, while the wonted
Marriage Chorus goes forth from universal Lineland, the three far-off
Lovers suddenly find themselves in exact harmony, and, before they are
aware, the wedded Triplet is rapt vocally into a duplicate embrace; and
Nature rejoices over one more marriage and over three more births."




14
How I vainly tried to explain the nature of Flatland


Thinking that it was time to bring down the Monarch from his raptures
to the level of common sense, I determined to endeavour to open up to
him some glimpses of the truth, that is to say of the nature of things
in Flatland.  So I began thus:  "How does your Royal Highness
distinguish the shapes and positions of his subjects?  I for my part
noticed by the sense of sight, before I entered your Kingdom, that some
of your people are lines and others Points; and that some of the lines
are larger--"  "You speak of an impossibility," interrupted the King;
"you must have seen a vision; for to detect the difference between a
Line and a Point by the sense of sight is, as every one knows, in the
nature of things, impossible; but it can be detected by the sense of
hearing, and by the same means my shape can be exactly ascertained.
Behold me--I am a Line, the longest in Lineland, over six inches of
Space--" "Of Length," I ventured to suggest.  "Fool," said he, "Space
is Length.  Interrupt me again, and I have done."

I apologized; but he continued scornfully, "Since you are impervious to
argument, you shall hear with your ears how by means of my two voices I
reveal my shape to my Wives, who are at this moment six thousand miles
seventy yards two feet eight inches away, the one to the North, the
other to the South.  Listen, I call to them."

He chirruped, and then complacently continued:  "My wives at this
moment receiving the sound of one of my voice, closely followed by the
other, and perceiving that the latter reaches them after an interval in
which sound can traverse 6.457 inches, infer that one of my mouths is
6.457 inches further from them than the other, and accordingly know my
shape to be 6.457 inches.  But you will of course understand that my
wives do not make this calculation every time they hear my two voices.
They made it, once for all, before we were married.  But they COULD
make it at any time.  And in the same way I can estimate the shape of
any of my Male subjects by the sense of sound."

"But how," said I, "if a Man feigns a Woman's voice with one of his two
voices, or so disguises his Southern voice that it cannot be recognized
as the echo of the Northern?  May not such deceptions cause great
inconvenience?  And have you no means of checking frauds of this kind
by commanding your neighbouring subjects to feel one another?" This of
course was a very stupid question, for feeling could not have answered
the purpose; but I asked with the view of irritating the Monarch, and I
succeeded perfectly.

"What!" cried he in horror, "explain your meaning."  "Feel, touch, come
into contact," I replied.  "If you mean by FEELING," said the King,
"approaching so close as to leave no space between two individuals,
know, Stranger, that this offence is punishable in my dominions by
death.  And the reason is obvious.  The frail form of a Woman, being
liable to be shattered by such an approximation, must be preserved by
the State; but since Women cannot be distinguished by the sense of
sight from Men, the Law ordains universally that neither Man nor Woman
shall be approached so closely as to destroy the interval between the
approximator and the approximated.

"And indeed what possible purpose would be served by this illegal and
unnatural excess of approximation which you call TOUCHING, when all the
ends of so brutal and course a process are attained at once more easily
and more exactly by the sense of hearing?  As to your suggested danger
of deception, it is non-existent: for the Voice, being the essence of
one's Being, cannot be thus changed at will.  But come, suppose that I
had the power of passing through solid things, so that I could
penetrate my subjects, one after another, even to the number of a
billion, verifying the size and distance of each by the sense of
FEELING:  How much time and energy would be wasted in this clumsy and
inaccurate method!  Whereas now, in one moment of audition, I take as
it were the census and statistics, local, corporeal, mental and
spiritual, of every living being in Lineland.  Hark, only hark!"

So saying he paused and listened, as if in an ecstasy, to a sound which
seemed to me no better than a tiny chirping from an innumerable
multitude of lilliputian grasshoppers.

"Truly," replied I, "your sense of hearing serves you in good stead,
and fills up many of your deficiencies.  But permit me to point out
that your life in Lineland must be deplorably dull.  To see nothing but
a Point!  Not even to be able to contemplate a Straight Line!  Nay, not
even to know what a Straight Line is!  To see, yet to be cut off from
those Linear prospects which are vouchsafed to us in Flatland!  Better
surely to have no sense of sight at all than to see so little!  I grant
you I have not your discriminative faculty of hearing; for the concert
of all Lineland which gives you such intense pleasure, is to me no
better than a multitudinous twittering or chirping.  But at least I can
discern, by sight, a Line from a Point.  And let me prove it.  Just
before I came into your kingdom, I saw you dancing from left to right,
and then from right to left, with Seven Men and a Woman in your
immediate proximity on the left, and eight Men and two Women on your
right.  Is not this correct?"

"It is correct," said the King, "so far as the numbers and sexes are
concerned, though I know not what you mean by 'right' and 'left.' But I
deny that you saw these things.  For how could you see the Line, that
is to say the inside, of any Man?  But you must have heard these
things, and then dreamed that you saw them.  And let me ask what you
mean by those words 'left' and 'right.'  I suppose it is your way of
saying Northward and Southward."

"Not so," replied I; "besides your motion of Northward and Southward,
there is another motion which I call from right to left."

King.  Exhibit to me, if you please, this motion from left to right.

I.  Nay, that I cannot do, unless you could step out of your Line
altogether.

King.  Out of my Line?  Do you mean out of the world?  Out of Space?

I.  Well, yes.  Out of YOUR world.  Out of YOUR Space.  For your Space
is not the true Space.  True Space is a Plane; but your Space is only a
Line.

King.  If you cannot indicate this motion from left to right by
yourself moving in it, then I beg you to describe it to me in words.

I.  If you cannot tell your right side from your left, I fear that no
words of mine can make my meaning clearer to you.  But surely you
cannot be ignorant of so simple a distinction.

King.  I do not in the least understand you.

I.  Alas!  How shall I make it clear?  When you move straight on, does
it not sometimes occur to you that you COULD move in some other way,
turning your eye round so as to look in the direction towards which
your side is now fronting?  In other words, instead of always moving in
the direction of one of your extremities, do you never feel a desire to
move in the direction, so to speak, of your side?

King.  Never.  And what do you mean?  How can a man's inside "front" in
any direction?  Or how can a man move in the direction of his inside?

I.  Well then, since words cannot explain the matter, I will try deeds,
and will move gradually out of Lineland in the direction which I desire
to indicate to you.

At the word I began to move my body out of Lineland.  As long as any
part of me remained in his dominion and in his view, the King kept
exclaiming, "I see you, I see you still; you are not moving." But when
I had at last moved myself out of his Line, he cried in his shrillest
voice, "She is vanished; she is dead."  "I am not dead," replied I; "I
am simply out of Lineland, that is to say, out of the Straight Line
which you call Space, and in the true Space, where I can see things as
they are.  And at this moment I can see your Line, or side--or inside
as you are pleased to call it; and I can see also the Men and Women on
the North and South of you, whom I will now enumerate, describing their
order, their size, and the interval between each."

When I had done this at great length, I cried triumphantly, "Does that
at last convince you?"  And, with that, I once more entered Lineland,
taking up the same position as before.

But the Monarch replied, "If you were a Man of sense--though, as you
appear to have only one voice I have little doubt you are not a Man but
a Woman--but, if you had a particle of sense, you would listen to
reason.  You ask me to believe that there is another Line besides that
which my senses indicate, and another motion besides that of which I am
daily conscious.  I, in return, ask you to describe in words or
indicate by motion that other Line of which you speak.  Instead of
moving, you merely exercise some magic art of vanishing and returning
to sight; and instead of any lucid description of your new World, you
simply tell me the numbers and sizes of some forty of my retinue, facts
known to any child in my capital.  Can anything be more irrational or
audacious?  Acknowledge your folly or depart from my dominions."

Furious at his perversity, and especially indignant that he professed
to be ignorant of my sex, I retorted in no measured terms, "Besotted
Being!  You think yourself the perfection of existence, while you are
in reality the most imperfect and imbecile.  You profess to see,
whereas you see nothing but a Point!  You plume yourself on inferring
the existence of a Straight Line; but I CAN SEE Straight Lines, and
infer the existence of Angles, Triangles, Squares, Pentagons, Hexagons,
and even Circles.  Why waste more words?  Suffice it that I am the
completion of your incomplete self.  You are a Line, but I am a Line of
Lines called in my country a Square:  and even I, infinitely superior
though I am to you, am of little account among the great nobles of
Flatland, whence I have come to visit you, in the hope of enlightening
your ignorance."

Hearing these words the King advanced towards me with a menacing cry as
if to pierce me through the diagonal; and in that same movement there
arose from myriads of his subjects a multitudinous war-cry, increasing
in vehemence till at last methought it rivalled the roar of an army of
a hundred thousand Isosceles, and the artillery of a thousand
Pentagons.  Spell-bound and motionless, I could neither speak nor move
to avert the impending destruction; and still the noise grew louder,
and the King came closer, when I awoke to find the breakfast-bell
recalling me to the realities of Flatland.




15
Concerning a Stranger from Spaceland


From dreams I proceed to facts.

It was the last day of our 1999th year of our era.  The patterning of
the rain had long ago announced nightfall; and I was sitting (footnote
3) in the company of my wife, musing on the events of the past and the
prospects of the coming year, the coming century, the coming Millennium.

My four Sons and two orphan Grandchildren had retired to their several
apartments; and my wife alone remained with me to see the old
Millennium out and the new one in.

I was rapt in thought, pondering in my mind some words that had
casually issued from the mouth of my youngest Grandson, a most
promising young Hexagon of unusual brilliancy and perfect angularity.
His uncles and I had been giving him his usual practical lesson in
Sight Recognition, turning ourselves upon our centres, now rapidly, now
more slowly, and questioning him as to our positions; and his answers
had been so satisfactory that I had been induced to reward him by
giving him a few hints on Arithmetic, as applied to Geometry.

Taking nine Squares, each an inch every way, I had put them together so
as to make one large Square, with a side of three inches, and I had
hence proved to my little Grandson that--though it was impossible for
us to SEE the inside of the Square--yet we might ascertain the number
of square inches in a Square by simply squaring the number of inches in
the side:  "and thus," said I, "we know that three-to-the-second, or
nine, represents the number of square inches in a Square whose side is
three inches long."

The little Hexagon meditated on this a while and then said to me; "But
you have been teaching me to raise numbers to the third power: I
suppose three-to-the-third must mean something in Geometry; what does
it mean?"  "Nothing at all," replied I, "not at least in Geometry; for
Geometry has only Two Dimensions."  And then I began to shew the boy
how a Point by moving through a length of three inches makes a Line of
three inches, which may be represented by three; and how a Line of
three inches, moving parallel to itself through a length of three
inches, makes a Square of three inches every way, which may be
represented by three-to-the-second.  xxx Upon this, my Grandson, again
returning to his former suggestion, took me up rather suddenly and
exclaimed, "Well, then, if a Point by moving three inches, makes a Line
of three inches represented by three; and if a straight Line of three
inches, moving parallel to itself, makes a Square of three inches every
way, represented by three-to-the-second; it must be that a Square of
three inches every way, moving somehow parallel to itself (but I don't
see how) must make Something else (but I don't see what) of three
inches every way--and this must be represented by three-to-the-third."

"Go to bed," said I, a little ruffled by this interruption: "if you
would talk less nonsense, you would remember more sense."

So my Grandson had disappeared in disgrace; and there I sat by my
Wife's side, endeavouring to form a retrospect of the year 1999 and of
the possibilities of the year 2000; but not quite able to shake of the
thoughts suggested by the prattle of my bright little Hexagon.  Only a
few sands now remained in the half-hour glass.  Rousing myself from my
reverie I turned the glass Northward for the last time in the old
Millennium; and in the act, I exclaimed aloud, "The boy is a fool."

Straightway I became conscious of a Presence in the room, and a
chilling breath thrilled through my very being.  "He is no such thing,"
cried my Wife, "and you are breaking the Commandments in thus
dishonouring your own Grandson."  But I took no notice of her.  Looking
around in every direction I could see nothing; yet still I FELT a
Presence, and shivered as the cold whisper came again.  I started up.
"What is the matter?" said my Wife, "there is no draught; what are you
looking for?  There is nothing."  There was nothing; and I resumed my
seat, again exclaiming, "The boy is a fool, I say; three-to-the-third
can have no meaning in Geometry." At once there came a distinctly
audible reply, "The boy is not a fool; and three-to-the-third has an
obvious Geometrical meaning."

My Wife as well as myself heard the words, although she did not
understand their meaning, and both of us sprang forward in the
direction of the sound.  What was our horror when we saw before us a
Figure!  At the first glance it appeared to be a Woman, seen sideways;
but a moment's observation shewed me that the extremities passed into
dimness too rapidly to represent one of the Female Sex; and I should
have thought it a Circle, only that it seemed to change its size in a
manner impossible for a Circle or for any regular Figure of which I had
had experience.

But my Wife had not my experience, nor the coolness necessary to note
these characteristics.  With the usual hastiness and unreasoning
jealousy of her Sex, she flew at once to the conclusion that a Woman
had entered the house through some small aperture.  "How comes this
person here?" she exclaimed, "you promised me, my dear, that there
should be no ventilators in our new house."  "Nor are they any," said
I; "but what makes you think that the stranger is a Woman?  I see by my
power of Sight Recognition--"

"Oh, I have no patience with your Sight Recognition," replied she,
"'Feeling is believing' and 'A Straight Line to the touch is worth a
Circle to the sight'"--two Proverbs, very common with the Frailer Sex
in Flatland.

"Well," said I, for I was afraid of irritating her, "if it must be so,
demand an introduction."  Assuming her most gracious manner, my Wife
advanced towards the Stranger, "Permit me, Madam to feel and be felt
by--" then, suddenly recoiling, "Oh! it is not a Woman, and there are
no angles either, not a trace of one.  Can it be that I have so
misbehaved to a perfect Circle?"

"I am indeed, in a certain sense a Circle," replied the Voice, "and a
more perfect Circle than any in Flatland; but to speak more accurately,
I am many Circles in one."  Then he added more mildly, "I have a
message, dear Madam, to your husband, which I must not deliver in your
presence; and, if you would suffer us to retire for a few minutes--"
But my wife would not listen to the proposal that our august Visitor
should so incommode himself, and assuring the Circle that the hour of
her own retirement had long passed, with many reiterated apologies for
her recent indiscretion, she at last retreated to her apartment.

I glanced at the half-hour glass.  The last sands had fallen.  The
third Millennium had begun.


Footnote 3.  When I say "sitting," of course I do not mean any change
of attitude such as you in Spaceland signify by that word; for as we
have no feet, we can no more "sit" nor "stand" (in your sense of the
word) than one of your soles or flounders.

Nevertheless, we perfectly well recognize the different mental states
of volition implied by "lying," "sitting," and "standing," which are to
some extent indicated to a beholder by a slight increase of lustre
corresponding to the increase of volition.

But on this, and a thousand other kindred subjects, time forbids me to
dwell.




16
  How the Stranger vainly endeavoured to reveal to me
             in words the mysteries of Spaceland


As soon as the sound of the Peace-cry of my departing Wife had died
away, I began to approach the Stranger with the intention of taking a
nearer view and of bidding him be seated:  but his appearance struck me
dumb and motionless with astonishment.  Without the slightest symptoms
of angularity he nevertheless varied every instant with graduations of
size and brightness scarcely possible for any Figure within the scope
of my experience.  The thought flashed across me that I might have
before me a burglar or cut-throat, some monstrous Irregular Isosceles,
who, by feigning the voice of a Circle, had obtained admission somehow
into the house, and was now preparing to stab me with his acute angle.

In a sitting-room, the absence of Fog (and the season happened to be
remarkably dry), made it difficult for me to trust to Sight
Recognition, especially at the short distance at which I was standing.
Desperate with fear, I rushed forward with an unceremonious, "You must
permit me, Sir--" and felt him.  My Wife was right.  There was not the
trace of an angle, not the slightest roughness or inequality: never in
my life had I met with a more perfect Circle.  He remained motionless
while I walked around him, beginning from his eye and returning to it
again.  Circular he was throughout, a perfectly satisfactory Circle;
there could not be a doubt of it.  Then followed a dialogue, which I
will endeavour to set down as near as I can recollect it, omitting only
some of my profuse apologies--for I was covered with shame and
humiliation that I, a Square, should have been guilty of the
impertinence of feeling a Circle.  It was commenced by the Stranger
with some impatience at the lengthiness of my introductory process.

Stranger.  Have you felt me enough by this time?  Are you not
introduced to me yet?

I.  Most illustrious Sir, excuse my awkwardness, which arises not from
ignorance of the usages of polite society, but from a little surprise
and nervousness, consequent on this somewhat unexpected visit.  And I
beseech you to reveal my indiscretion to no one, and especially not to
my Wife.  But before your Lordship enters into further communications,
would he deign to satisfy the curiosity of one who would gladly know
whence his visitor came?

Stranger.  From Space, from Space, Sir:  whence else?

I.  Pardon me, my Lord, but is not your Lordship already in Space, your
Lordship and his humble servant, even at this moment?

Stranger.  Pooh! what do you know of Space?  Define Space.

I.  Space, my Lord, is height and breadth indefinitely prolonged.

Stranger.  Exactly:  you see you do not even know what Space is.  You
think it is of Two Dimensions only; but I have come to announce to you
a Third--height, breadth, and length.

I.  Your Lordship is pleased to be merry.  We also speak of length and
height, or breadth and thickness, thus denoting Two Dimensions by four
names.

Stranger.  But I mean not only three names, but Three Dimensions.

I.  Would your Lordship indicate or explain to me in what direction is
the Third Dimension, unknown to me?

Stranger.  I came from it.  It is up above and down below.

I.  My Lord means seemingly that it is Northward and Southward.

Stranger.  I mean nothing of the kind.  I mean a direction in which you
cannot look, because you have no eye in your side.

I.  Pardon me, my Lord, a moment's inspection will convince your
Lordship that I have a perfectly luminary at the juncture of my two
sides.

Stranger:  Yes:  but in order to see into Space you ought to have an
eye, not on your Perimeter, but on your side, that is, on what you
would probably call your inside; but we in Spaceland should call it
your side.

I.  An eye in my inside!  An eye in my stomach!  Your Lordship jests.

Stranger.  I am in no jesting humour.  I tell you that I come from
Space, or, since you will not understand what Space means, from the
Land of Three Dimensions whence I but lately looked down upon your
Plane which you call Space forsooth.  From that position of advantage I
discerned all that you speak of as SOLID (by which you mean "enclosed
on four sides"), your houses, your churches, your very chests and
safes, yes even your insides and stomachs, all lying open and exposed
to my view.

I.  Such assertions are easily made, my Lord.

Stranger.  But not easily proved, you mean.  But I mean to prove mine.

When I descended here, I saw your four Sons, the Pentagons, each in his
apartment, and your two Grandsons the Hexagons; I saw your youngest
Hexagon remain a while with you and then retire to his room, leaving
you and your Wife alone.  I saw your Isosceles servants, three in
number, in the kitchen at supper, and the little Page in the scullery.
Then I came here, and how do you think I came?

I.  Through the roof, I suppose.

Strange.  Not so.  Your roof, as you know very well, has been recently
repaired, and has no aperture by which even a Woman could penetrate.  I
tell you I come from Space.  Are you not convinced by what I have told
you of your children and household?

I.  Your Lordship must be aware that such facts touching the belongings
of his humble servant might be easily ascertained by any one of the
neighbourhood possessing your Lordship's ample means of information.

Stranger.  (TO HIMSELF.)  What must I do?  Stay; one more argument
suggests itself to me.  When you see a Straight Line-- your wife, for
example--how many Dimensions do you attribute to her?

I.  Your Lordship would treat me as if I were one of the vulgar who,
being ignorant of Mathematics, suppose that a Woman is really a
Straight Line, and only of One Dimension.  No, no, my Lord; we Squares
are better advised, and are as well aware of your Lordship that a
Woman, though popularly called a Straight Line, is, really and
scientifically, a very thin Parallelogram, possessing Two Dimensions,
like the rest of us, viz., length and breadth (or thickness).

Stranger.  But the very fact that a Line is visible implies that it
possesses yet another Dimension.

I.  My Lord, I have just acknowledged that a Woman is broad as well as
long.  We see her length, we infer her breadth; which, though very
slight, is capable of measurement.

Stranger.  You do not understand me.  I mean that when you see a Woman,
you ought--besides inferring her breadth--to see her length, and to SEE
what we call her HEIGHT; although the last Dimension is infinitesimal
in your country.  If a Line were mere length without "height," it would
cease to occupy Space and would become invisible.  Surely you must
recognize this?

I.  I must indeed confess that I do not in the least understand your
Lordship.  When we in Flatland see a Line, we see length and
BRIGHTNESS.  If the brightness disappears, the Line is extinguished,
and, as you say, ceases to occupy Space.  But am I to suppose that your
Lordship gives the brightness the title of a Dimension, and that what
we call "bright" you call "high"?

Stranger.  No, indeed.  By "height" I mean a Dimension like your
length: only, with you, "height" is not so easily perceptible, being
extremely small.

I.  My Lord, your assertion is easily put to the test.  You say I have
a Third Dimension, which you call "height."  Now, Dimension implies
direction and measurement.  Do but measure my "height," or merely
indicate to me the direction in which my "height" extends, and I will
become your convert.  Otherwise, your Lordship's own understand must
hold me excused.

Stranger.  (TO HIMSELF.)  I can do neither.  How shall I convince him?
Surely a plain statement of facts followed by ocular demonstration
ought to suffice.  --Now, Sir; listen to me.

You are living on a Plane.  What you style Flatland is the vast level
surface of what I may call a fluid, or in, the top of which you and
your countrymen move about, without rising above or falling below it.

I am not a plane Figure, but a Solid.  You call me a Circle; but in
reality I am not a Circle, but an infinite number of Circles, of size
varying from a Point to a Circle of thirteen inches in diameter, one
placed on the top of the other.  When I cut through your plane as I am
now doing, I make in your plane a section which you, very rightly, call
a Circle.  For even a Sphere--which is my proper name in my own
country--if he manifest himself at all to an inhabitant of
Flatland--must needs manifest himself as a Circle.

Do you not remember--for I, who see all things, discerned last night
the phantasmal vision of Lineland written upon your brain--do you not
remember, I say, how when you entered the realm of Lineland, you were
compelled to manifest yourself to the King, not as a Square, but as a
Line, because that Linear Realm had not Dimensions enough to represent
the whole of you, but only a slice or section of you?  In precisely the
same way, your country of Two Dimensions is not spacious enough to
represent me, a being of Three, but can only exhibit a slice or section
of me, which is what you call a Circle.

The diminished brightness of your eye indicates incredulity.  But now
prepare to receive proof positive of the truth of my assertions.  You
cannot indeed see more than one of my sections, or Circles, at a time;
for you have no power to raise your eye out of the plane of Flatland;
but you can at least see that, as I rise in Space, so my sections
become smaller.  See now, I will rise; and the effect upon your eye
will be that my Circle will become smaller and smaller till it dwindles
to a point and finally vanishes.

There was no "rising" that I could see; but he diminished and finally
vanished.  I winked once or twice to make sure that I was not dreaming.
But it was no dream.  For from the depths of nowhere came forth a
hollow voice--close to my heart it seemed--"Am I quite gone?  Are you
convinced now?  Well, now I will gradually return to Flatland and you
shall see my section become larger and larger."

Every reader in Spaceland will easily understand that my mysterious
Guest was speaking the language of truth and even of simplicity.  But
to me, proficient though I was in Flatland Mathematics, it was by no
means a simple matter.  The rough diagram given above will make it
clear to any Spaceland child that the Sphere, ascending in the three
positions indicated there, must needs have manifested himself to me, or
to any Flatlander, as a Circle, at first of full size, then small, and
at last very small indeed, approaching to a Point.  But to me, although
I saw the facts before me, the causes were as dark as ever.  All that I
could comprehend was, that the Circle had made himself smaller and
vanished, and that he had now re-appeared and was rapidly making
himself larger.

When he regained his original size, he heaved a deep sigh; for he
perceived by my silence that I had altogether failed to comprehend him.
And indeed I was now inclining to the belief that he must be no Circle
at all, but some extremely clever juggler; or else that the old wives'
tales were true, and that after all there were such people as
Enchanters and Magicians.

After a long pause he muttered to himself, "One resource alone remains,
if I am not to resort to action.  I must try the method of Analogy."
Then followed a still longer silence, after which he continued our
dialogue.

Sphere.  Tell me, Mr. Mathematician; if a Point moves Northward, and
leaves a luminous wake, what name would you give to the wake?

I.  A straight Line.

Sphere.  And a straight Line has how many extremities?

I.  Two.

Sphere.  Now conceive the Northward straight Line moving parallel to
itself, East and West, so that every point in it leaves behind it the
wake of a straight Line.  What name will you give to the Figure thereby
formed?  We will suppose that it moves through a distance equal to the
original straight line. --What name, I say?

I.  A square.

Sphere.  And how many sides has a Square?  How many angles?

I.  Four sides and four angles.

Sphere.  Now stretch your imagination a little, and conceive a Square
in Flatland, moving parallel to itself upward.

I.  What?  Northward?

Sphere.  No, not Northward; upward; out of Flatland altogether.

If it moved Northward, the Southern points in the Square would have to
move through the positions previously occupied by the Northern points.
But that is not my meaning.

I mean that every Point in you--for you are a Square and will serve the
purpose of my illustration--every Point in you, that is to say in what
you call your inside, is to pass upwards through Space in such a way
that no Point shall pass through the position previously occupied by
any other Point; but each Point shall describe a straight Line of its
own.  This is all in accordance with Analogy; surely it must be clear
to you.

Restraining my impatience--for I was now under a strong temptation to
rush blindly at my Visitor and to precipitate him into Space, or out of
Flatland, anywhere, so that I could get rid of him--I replied:--

"And what may be the nature of the Figure which I am to shape out by
this motion which you are pleased to denote by the word 'upward'?  I
presume it is describable in the language of Flatland."

Sphere.  Oh, certainly.  It is all plain and simple, and in strict
accordance with Analogy--only, by the way, you must not speak of the
result as being a Figure, but as a Solid.  But I will describe it to
you.  Or rather not I, but Analogy.

We began with a single Point, which of course--being itself a
Point--has only ONE terminal Point.

One Point produces a Line with TWO terminal Points.

One Line produces a Square with FOUR terminal Points.

Now you can give yourself the answer to your own question:  1, 2, 4,
are evidently in Geometrical Progression.  What is the next number?

I.  Eight.

Sphere.  Exactly.  The one Square produces a SOMETHING-WHICH-YOU-
DO-NOT-AS-YET-KNOW-A-NAME-FOR-BUT-WHICH-WE-CALL-A-CUBE with EIGHT
terminal Points.  Now are you convinced?

I.  And has this Creature sides, as well as Angles or what you call
"terminal Points"?

Sphere.  Of course; and all according to Analogy.  But, by the way, not
what YOU call sides, but what WE call sides.  You would call them
SOLIDS.

I.  And how many solids or sides will appertain to this Being whom I am
to generate by the motion of my inside in an "upward" direction, and
whom you call a Cube?

Sphere.  How can you ask?  And you a mathematician!  The side of
anything is always, if I may so say, one Dimension behind the thing.
Consequently, as there is no Dimension behind a Point, a Point has 0
sides; a Line, if I may so say, has 2 sides (for the points of a Line
may be called by courtesy, its sides); a Square has 4 sides; 0, 2, 4;
what Progression do you call that?

I.  Arithmetical.

Sphere.  And what is the next number?

I.  Six.

Sphere.  Exactly.  Then you see you have answered your own question.
The Cube which you will generate will be bounded by six sides, that is
to say, six of your insides.  You see it all now, eh?

"Monster," I shrieked, "be thou juggler, enchanter, dream, or devil, no
more will I endure thy mockeries.  Either thou or I must perish."  And
saying these words I precipitated myself upon him.




17
  How the Sphere, having in vain tried words, resorted to
deeds


It was in vain.  I brought my hardest right angle into violent
collision with the Stranger, pressing on him with a force sufficient to
have destroyed any ordinary Circle:  but I could feel him slowly and
unarrestably slipping from my contact; not edging to the right nor to
the left, but moving somehow out of the world, and vanishing into
nothing.  Soon there was a blank.  But still I heard the Intruder's
voice.

Sphere.  Why will you refuse to listen to reason?  I had hoped to find
in you--as being a man of sense and an accomplished mathematician--a
fit apostle for the Gospel of the Three Dimensions, which I am allowed
to preach once only in a thousand years:  but now I know not how to
convince you.  Stay, I have it.  Deeds, and not words, shall proclaim
the truth.  Listen, my friend.

I have told you I can see from my position in Space the inside of all
things that you consider closed.  For example, I see in yonder cupboard
near which you are standing, several of what you call boxes (but like
everything else in Flatland, they have no tops or bottom) full of
money; I see also two tablets of accounts.  I am about to descend into
that cupboard and to bring you one of those tablets.  I saw you lock
the cupboard half an hour ago, and I know you have the key in your
possession.  But I descend from Space; the doors, you see, remain
unmoved.  Now I am in the cupboard and am taking the tablet.  Now I
have it.  Now I ascend with it.

I rushed to the closet and dashed the door open.  One of the tablets
was gone.  With a mocking laugh, the Stranger appeared in the other
corner of the room, and at the same time the tablet appeared upon the
floor.  I took it up.  There could be no doubt--it was the missing
tablet.

I groaned with horror, doubting whether I was not out of my sense; but
the Stranger continued:  "Surely you must now see that my explanation,
and no other, suits the phenomena.  What you call Solid things are
really superficial; what you call Space is really nothing but a great
Plane.  I am in Space, and look down upon the insides of the things of
which you only see the outsides.  You could leave the Plane yourself,
if you could but summon up the necessary volition.  A slight upward or
downward motion would enable you to see all that I can see.

"The higher I mount, and the further I go from your Plane, the more I
can see, though of course I see it on a smaller scale.  For example, I
am ascending; now I can see your neighbour the Hexagon and his family
in their several apartments; now I see the inside of the Theatre, ten
doors off, from which the audience is only just departing; and on the
other side a Circle in his study, sitting at his books.  Now I shall
come back to you.  And, as a crowning proof, what do you say to my
giving you a touch, just the least touch, in your stomach?  It will not
seriously injure you, and the slight pain you may suffer cannot be
compared with the mental benefit you will receive."

Before I could utter a word of remonstrance, I felt a shooting pain in
my inside, and a demoniacal laugh seemed to issue from within me.  A
moment afterwards the sharp agony had ceased, leaving nothing but a
dull ache behind, and the Stranger began to reappear, saying, as he
gradually increased in size, "There, I have not hurt you much, have I?
If you are not convinced now, I don't know what will convince you.
What say you?"

My resolution was taken.  It seemed intolerable that I should endure
existence subject to the arbitrary visitations of a Magician who could
thus play tricks with one's very stomach.  If only I could in any way
manage to pin him against the wall till help came!

Once more I dashed my hardest angle against him, at the same time
alarming the whole household by my cries for aid.  I believe, at the
moment of my onset, the Stranger had sunk below our Plane, and really
found difficulty in rising.  In any case he remained motionless, while
I, hearing, as I thought, the sound of some help approaching, pressed
against him with redoubled vigor, and continued to shout for assistance.

A convulsive shudder ran through the Sphere.  "This must not be," I
thought I heard him say:  "either he must listen to reason, or I must
have recourse to the last resource of civilization." Then, addressing
me in a louder tone, he hurriedly exclaimed, "Listen: no stranger must
witness what you have witnessed.  Send your Wife back at once, before
she enters the apartment.  The Gospel of Three Dimensions must not be
thus frustrated.  Not thus must the fruits of one thousand years of
waiting be thrown away.  I hear her coming.  Back! back!  Away from me,
or you must go with me--wither you know not--into the Land of Three
Dimensions!"

"Fool!  Madman!  Irregular!" I exclaimed; "never will I release thee;
thou shalt pay the penalty of thine impostures."

"Ha!  Is it come to this?" thundered the Stranger:  "then meet your
fate: out of your Plane you go.  Once, twice, thrice!  'Tis done!"




18
  How I came to Spaceland, and what I saw there


An unspeakable horror seized me.  There was a darkness; then a dizzy,
sickening sensation of sight that was not like seeing; I saw a Line
that was no Line; Space that was not Space:  I was myself, and not
myself.  When I could find voice, I shrieked loud in agony, "Either
this is madness or it is Hell."  "It is neither," calmly replied the
voice of the Sphere, "it is Knowledge; it is Three Dimensions:  open
your eye once again and try to look steadily."

I looked, and, behold, a new world!  There stood before me, visibly
incorporate, all that I had before inferred, conjectured, dreamed, of
perfect Circular beauty.  What seemed the centre of the Stranger's form
lay open to my view:  yet I could see no heart, lungs, nor arteries,
only a beautiful harmonious Something--for which I had no words; but
you, my Readers in Spaceland, would call it the surface of the Sphere.

Prostrating myself mentally before my Guide, I cried, "How is it, O
divine ideal of consummate loveliness and wisdom that I see thy inside,
and yet cannot discern thy heart, thy lungs, thy arteries, thy liver?"
"What you think you see, you see not," he replied; "it is not giving to
you, nor to any other Being, to behold my internal parts. I am of a
different order of Beings from those in Flatland.  Were I a Circle, you
could discern my intestines, but I am a Being, composed as I told you
before, of many Circles, the Many in the One, called in this country a
Sphere.  And, just as the outside of a Cube is a Square, so the outside
of a Sphere represents the appearance of a Circle."

Bewildered though I was by my Teacher's enigmatic utterance, I no
longer chafed against it, but worshipped him in silent adoration.  He
continued, with more mildness in his voice.  "Distress not yourself if
you cannot at first understand the deeper mysteries of Spaceland.  By
degrees they will dawn upon you.  Let us begin by casting back a glance
at the region whence you came.  Return with me a while to the plains of
Flatland and I will shew you that which you have often reasoned and
thought about, but never seen with the sense of sight--a visible
angle."  "Impossible!" I cried; but, the Sphere leading the way, I
followed as if in a dream, till once more his voice arrested me: "Look
yonder, and behold your own Pentagonal house, and all its inmates."

I looked below, and saw with my physical eye all that domestic
individuality which I had hitherto merely inferred with the
understanding.  And how poor and shadowy was the inferred conjecture in
comparison with the reality which I now behold!  My four Sons calmly
asleep in the North-Western rooms, my two orphan Grandsons to the
South; the Servants, the Butler, my Daughter, all in their several
apartments.  Only my affectionate Wife, alarmed by my continued
absence, had quitted her room and was roving up and down in the Hall,
anxiously awaiting my return.  Also the Page, aroused by my cries, had
left his room, and under pretext of ascertaining whether I had fallen
somewhere in a faint, was prying into the cabinet in my study.  All
this I could now SEE, not merely infer; and as we came nearer and
nearer, I could discern even the contents of my cabinet, and the two
chests of gold, and the tablets of which the Sphere had made mention.

Touched by my Wife's distress, I would have sprung downward to reassure
her, but I found myself incapable of motion.  "Trouble not yourself
about your Wife," said my Guide: "she will not be long left in anxiety;
meantime, let us take a survey of Flatland."

Once more I felt myself rising through space.  It was even as the
Sphere had said.  The further we receded from the object we beheld, the
larger became the field of vision.  My native city, with the interior
of every house and every creature therein, lay open to my view in
miniature.  We mounted higher, and lo, the secrets of the earth, the
depths of the mines and inmost caverns of the hills, were bared before
me.

Awestruck at the sight of the mysteries of the earth, thus unveiled
before my unworthy eye, I said to my Companion, "Behold, I am become as
a God.  For the wise men in our country say that to see all things, or
as they express it, OMNIVIDENCE, is the attribute of God alone." There
was something of scorn in the voice of my Teacher as he made answer:
"is it so indeed?  Then the very pick-pockets and cut-throats of my
country are to be worshipped by your wise men as being Gods: for there
is not one of them that does not see as much as you see now.  But trust
me, your wise men are wrong."

I.  Then is omnividence the attribute of others besides Gods?

Sphere.  I do not know.  But, if a pick-pocket or a cut-throat of our
country can see everything that is in your country, surely that is no
reason why the pick-pocket or cut-throat should be accepted by you as a
God.  This omnividence, as you call it--it is not a common word in
Spaceland--does it make you more just, more merciful, less selfish,
more loving?  Not in the least.  Then how does it make you more divine?

I.  "More merciful, more loving!"  But these are the qualities of
women!  And we know that a Circle is a higher Being than a Straight
Line, in so far as knowledge and wisdom are more to be esteemed than
mere affection.

Sphere.  It is not for me to classify human faculties according to
merit.  Yet many of the best and wisest in Spaceland think more of the
affections than of the understanding, more of your despised Straight Lines
than of your belauded Circles.  But enough of this.  Look yonder.  Do
you know that building?

I looked, and afar off I saw an immense Polygonal structure, in which I
recognized the General Assembly Hall of the States of Flatland,
surrounded by dense lines of Pentagonal buildings at right angles to
each other, which I knew to be streets; and I perceived that I was
approaching the great Metropolis.

"Here we descend," said my Guide.  It was now morning, the first hour
of the first day of the two thousandth year of our era.  Acting, as was
their wont, in strict accordance with precedent, the highest Circles of
the realm were meeting in solemn conclave, as they had met on the first
hour of the first day of the year 1000, and also on the first hour of
the first day of the year 0.

The minutes of the previous meetings were now read by one whom I at
once recognized as my brother, a perfectly Symmetrical Square, and the
Chief Clerk of the High Council.  It was found recorded on each
occasion that:  "Whereas the States had been troubled by divers
ill-intentioned persons pretending to have received revelations from
another World, and professing to produce demonstrations whereby they
had instigated to frenzy both themselves and others, it had been for
this cause unanimously resolved by the Grand Council that on the first
day of each millenary, special injunctions be sent to the Prefects in
the several districts of Flatland, to make strict search for such
misguided persons, and without formality of mathematical examination,
to destroy all such as were Isosceles of any degree, to scourge and
imprison any regular Triangle, to cause any Square or Pentagon to be
sent to the district Asylum, and to arrest any one of higher rank,
sending him straightway to the Capital to be examined and judged by the
Council."

"You hear your fate," said the Sphere to me, while the Council was
passing for the third time the formal resolution.  "Death or
imprisonment awaits the Apostle of the Gospel of Three Dimensions."
"Not so," replied I, "the matter is now so clear to me, the nature of
real space so palpable, that methinks I could make a child understand
it.  Permit me but to descend at this moment and enlighten them." "Not
yet," said my Guide, "the time will come for that.  Meantime I must
perform my mission.  Stay thou there in thy place." Saying these words,
he leaped with great dexterity into the sea (if I may so call it) of
Flatland, right in the midst of the ring of Counsellors.  "I come,"
said he, "to proclaim that there is a land of Three Dimensions."

I could see many of the younger Counsellors start back in manifest
horror, as the Sphere's circular section widened before them.  But on a
sign from the presiding Circle--who shewed not the slightest alarm or
surprise--six Isosceles of a low type from six different quarters
rushed upon the Sphere.  "We have him," they cried; "No; yes; we have
him still! he's going! he's gone!"

"My Lords," said the President to the Junior Circles of the Council,
"there is not the slightest need for surprise; the secret archives, to
which I alone have access, tell me that a similar occurrence happened
on the last two millennial commencements.  You will, of course, say
nothing of these trifles outside the Cabinet."

Raising his voice, he now summoned the guards.  "Arrest the policemen;
gag them.  You know your duty."  After he had consigned to their fate
the wretched policemen--ill-fated and unwilling witnesses of a
State-secret which they were not to be permitted to reveal--he again
addressed the Counsellors.  "My Lords, the business of the Council
being concluded, I have only to wish you a happy New Year." Before
departing, he expressed, at some length, to the Clerk, my excellent but
most unfortunate brother, his sincere regret that, in accordance with
precedent and for the sake of secrecy, he must condemn him to perpetual
imprisonment, but added his satisfaction that, unless some mention were
made by him of that day's incident, his life would be spared.




19
  How, though the Sphere shewed me other mysteries of
            Spaceland, I still desire more; and what came of it


When I saw my poor brother led away to imprisonment, I attempted to
leap down into the Council Chamber, desiring to intercede on his
behalf, or at least bid him farewell.  But I found that I had no motion
of my own.  I absolutely depended on the volition of my Guide, who said
in gloomy tones, "Heed not thy brother; haply thou shalt have ample
time hereafter to condole with him.  Follow me."

Once more we ascended into space.  "Hitherto," said the Sphere, "I have
shewn you naught save Plane Figures and their interiors.  Now I must
introduce you to Solids, and reveal to you the plan upon which they are
constructed.  Behold this multitude of moveable square cards.  See, I
put one on another, not, as you supposed, Northward of the other, but
ON the other.  Now a second, now a third.  See, I am building up a
Solid by a multitude of Squares parallel to one another.  Now the Solid
is complete, being as high as it is long and broad, and we call it a
Cube."

"Pardon me, my Lord," replied I; "but to my eye the appearance is as of
an Irregular Figure whose inside is laid open to view; in other words,
methinks I see no Solid, but a Plane such as we infer in Flatland; only
of an Irregularity which betokens some monstrous criminal, so that the
very sight of it is painful to my eyes."

"True," said the Sphere; "it appears to you a Plane, because you are
not accustomed to light and shade and perspective; just as in Flatland
a Hexagon would appear a Straight Line to one who has not the Art of
Sight Recognition.  But in reality it is a Solid, as you shall learn by
the sense of Feeling."

He then introduced me to the Cube, and I found that this marvellous
Being was indeed no Plane, but a Solid; and that he was endowed with
six plane sides and eight terminal points called solid angles; and I
remembered the saying of the Sphere that just such a Creature as this
would be formed by the Square moving, in Space, parallel to himself:
and I rejoiced to think that so insignificant a Creature as I could in
some sense be called the Progenitor of so illustrious an offspring.

But still I could not fully understand the meaning of what my Teacher
had told me concerning "light" and "shade" and "perspective"; and I did
not hesitate to put my difficulties before him.

Were I to give the Sphere's explanation of these matters, succinct and
clear though it was, it would be tedious to an inhabitant of Space, who
knows these things already.  Suffice it, that by his lucid statements,
and by changing the position of objects and lights, and by allowing me
to feel the several objects and even his own sacred Person, he at last
made all things clear to me, so that I could now readily distinguish
between a Circle and a Sphere, a Plane Figure and a Solid.

This was the Climax, the Paradise, of my strange eventful History.
Henceforth I have to relate the story of my miserable Fall:--most
miserable, yet surely most undeserved!  For why should the thirst for
knowledge be aroused, only to be disappointed and punished?  My
volition shrinks from the painful task of recalling my humiliation;
yet, like a second Prometheus, I will endure this and worse, if by any
means I may arouse in the interiors of Plane and Solid Humanity a
spirit of rebellion against the Conceit which would limit our
Dimensions to Two or Three or any number short of Infinity.  Away then
with all personal considerations!  Let me continue to the end, as I
began, without further digressions or anticipations, pursuing the plain
path of dispassionate History.  The exact facts, the exact words,--and
they are burnt in upon my brain,--shall be set down without alteration
of an iota; and let my Readers judge between me and Destiny.

The Sphere would willingly have continued his lessons by indoctrinating
me in the conformation of all regular Solids, Cylinders, Cones,
Pyramids, Pentahedrons, Hexahedrons, Dodecahedrons, and Spheres:  but I
ventured to interrupt him.  Not that I was wearied of knowledge.  On
the contrary, I thirsted for yet deeper and fuller draughts than he was
offering to me.

"Pardon me," said I, "O Thou Whom I must no longer address as the
Perfection of all Beauty; but let me beg thee to vouchsafe thy servant
a sight of thine interior."

Sphere.  My what?

I.  Thine interior:  thy stomach, thy intestines.

Sphere.  Whence this ill-timed impertinent request?  And what mean you
by saying that I am no longer the Perfection of all Beauty?

I.  My Lord, your own wisdom has taught me to aspire to One even more
great, more beautiful, and more closely approximate to Perfection than
yourself.  As you yourself, superior to all Flatland forms, combine
many Circles in One, so doubtless there is One above you who combines
many Spheres in One Supreme Existence, surpassing even the Solids of
Spaceland.  And even as we, who are now in Space, look down on Flatland
and see the insides of all things, so of a certainty there is yet above
us some higher, purer region, whither thou dost surely purpose to lead
me--O Thou Whom I shall always call, everywhere and in all Dimensions,
my Priest, Philosopher, and Friend--some yet more spacious Space, some
more dimensionable Dimensionality, from the vantage-ground of which we
shall look down together upon the revealed insides of Solid things, and
where thine own intestines, and those of thy kindred Spheres, will lie
exposed to the view of the poor wandering exile from Flatland, to whom
so much has already been vouchsafed.

Sphere.  Pooh!  Stuff!  Enough of this trifling!  The time is short,
and much remains to be done before you are fit to proclaim the Gospel
of Three Dimensions to your blind benighted countrymen in Flatland.

I.  Nay, gracious Teacher, deny me not what I know it is in thy power
to perform.  Grant me but one glimpse of thine interior, and I am
satisfied for ever, remaining henceforth thy docile pupil, thy
unemancipable slave, ready to receive all thy teachings and to feed upon
the words that fall from thy lips.

Sphere.  Well, then, to content and silence you, let me say at once, I
would shew you what you wish if I could; but I cannot.  Would you have
me turn my stomach inside out to oblige you?

I.  But my Lord has shewn me the intestines of all my countrymen in the
Land of Two Dimensions by taking me with him into the Land of Three.
What therefore more easy than now to take his servant on a second
journey into the blessed region of the Fourth Dimension, where I shall
look down with him once more upon this land of Three Dimensions, and
see the inside of every three-dimensioned house, the secrets of the
solid earth, the treasures of the mines of Spaceland, and the
intestines of every solid living creature, even the noble and adorable
Spheres.

Sphere.  But where is this land of Four Dimensions?

I.  I know not:  but doubtless my Teacher knows.

Sphere.  Not I.  There is no such land.  The very idea of it is utterly
inconceivable.

I.  Not inconceivable, my Lord, to me, and therefore still less
inconceivable to my Master.  Nay, I despair not that, even here, in
this region of Three Dimensions, your Lordship's art may make the
Fourth Dimension visible to me; just as in the Land of Two Dimensions
my Teacher's skill would fain have opened the eyes of his blind servant
to the invisible presence of a Third Dimension, though I saw it not.

Let me recall the past.  Was I not taught below that when I saw a Line
and inferred a Plane, I in reality saw a Third unrecognized Dimension,
not the same as brightness, called "height"?  And does it not now
follow that, in this region, when I see a Plane and infer a Solid, I
really see a Fourth unrecognized Dimension, not the same as colour, but
existent, though infinitesimal and incapable of measurement?

And besides this, there is the Argument from Analogy of Figures.

Sphere.  Analogy!  Nonsense:  what analogy?

I.  Your Lordship tempts his servant to see whether he remembers the
revelations imparted to him.  Trifle not with me, my Lord; I crave, I
thirst, for more knowledge.  Doubtless we cannot SEE that other higher
Spaceland now, because we have no eye in our stomachs.  But, just as
there WAS the realm of Flatland, though that poor puny Lineland Monarch
could neither turn to left nor right to discern it, and just as there
WAS close at hand, and touching my frame, the land of Three Dimensions,
though I, blind senseless wretch, had no power to touch it, no eye in
my interior to discern it, so of a surety there is a Fourth Dimension,
which my Lord perceives with the inner eye of thought.  And that it
must exist my Lord himself has taught me.  Or can he have forgotten
what he himself imparted to his servant?

In One Dimension, did not a moving Point produce a Line with TWO
terminal points?

In Two Dimensions, did not a moving Line produce a Square with FOUR
terminal points?

In Three Dimensions, did not a moving Square produce--did not this eye
of mine behold it--that blessed Being, a Cube, with EIGHT terminal
points?

And in Four Dimensions shall not a moving Cube--alas, for Analogy, and
alas for the Progress of Truth, if it be not so--shall not, I say, the
motion of a divine Cube result in a still more divine Organization with
SIXTEEN terminal points?

Behold the infallible confirmation of the Series, 2, 4, 8, 16:  is not
this a Geometrical Progression?  Is not this--if I might quote my
Lord's own words--"strictly according to Analogy"?

Again, was I not taught by my Lord that as in a Line there are TWO
bounding Points, and in a Square there are FOUR bounding Lines, so in a
Cube there must be SIX bounding Squares?  Behold once more the
confirming Series, 2, 4, 6:  is not this an Arithmetical Progression?
And consequently does it not of necessity follow that the more divine
offspring of the divine Cube in the Land of Four Dimensions, must have
8 bounding Cubes: and is not this also, as my Lord has taught me to
believe, "strictly according to Analogy"?  O, my Lord, my Lord, behold,
I cast myself in faith upon conjecture, not knowing the facts; and I
appeal to your Lordship to confirm or deny my logical anticipations.
If I am wrong, I yield, and will no longer demand a Fourth Dimension;
but, if I am right, my Lord will listen to reason.

I ask therefore, is it, or is it not, the fact, that ere now your
countrymen also have witnessed the descent of Beings of a higher order
than their own, entering closed rooms, even as your Lordship entered
mine, without the opening of doors or windows, and appearing and
vanishing at will?  On the reply to this question I am ready to stake
everything.  Deny it, and I am henceforth silent.  Only vouchsafe an
answer.

Sphere (AFTER A PAUSE).  It is reported so.  But men are divided in
opinion as to the facts.  And even granting the facts, they explain
them in different ways.  And in any case, however great may be the
number of different explanations, no one has adopted or suggested the
theory of a Fourth Dimension.  Therefore, pray have done with this
trifling, and let us return to business.

I.  I was certain of it.  I was certain that my anticipations would be
fulfilled.  And now have patience with me and answer me yet one more
question, best of Teachers!  Those who have thus appeared--no one knows
whence--and have returned--no one knows whither--have they also
contracted their sections and vanished somehow into that more Spacious
Space, whither I now entreat you to conduct me?

Sphere (MOODILY).  They have vanished, certainly--if they ever
appeared.  But most people say that these visions arose from the
thought--you will not understand me--from the brain; from the perturbed
angularity of the Seer.

I.  Say they so?  Oh, believe them not.  Or if it indeed be so, that
this other Space is really Thoughtland, then take me to that blessed
Region where I in Thought shall see the insides of all solid things.
There, before my ravished eye, a Cube moving in some altogether new
direction, but strictly according to Analogy, so as to make every
particle of his interior pass through a new kind of Space, with a wake
of its own--shall create a still more perfect perfection than himself,
with sixteen terminal Extra-solid angles, and Eight solid Cubes for his
Perimeter.  And once there, shall we stay our upward course?  In that
blessed region of Four Dimensions, shall we linger at the threshold of
the Fifth, and not enter therein?  Ah, no!  Let us rather resolve that
our ambition shall soar with our corporal ascent.  Then, yielding to
our intellectual onset, the gates of the Six Dimension shall fly open;
after that a Seventh, and then an Eighth--

How long I should have continued I know not.  In vain did the Sphere,
in his voice of thunder, reiterate his command of silence, and threaten
me with the direst penalties if I persisted.  Nothing could stem the
flood of my ecstatic aspirations.  Perhaps I was to blame; but indeed I
was intoxicated with the recent draughts of Truth to which he himself
had introduced me.  However, the end was not long in coming.  My words
were cut short by a crash outside, and a simultaneous crash inside me,
which impelled me through space with a velocity that precluded speech.
Down! down! down!  I was rapidly descending; and I knew that return to
Flatland was my doom.  One glimpse, one last and never-to-be-forgotten
glimpse I had of that dull level wilderness--which was now to become my
Universe again--spread out before my eye.  Then a darkness.  Then a
final, all-consummating thunder-peal; and, when I came to myself, I was
once more a common creeping Square, in my Study at home, listening to
the Peace-Cry of my approaching Wife.




20 
 How the Sphere encouraged me in a Vision.


Although I had less than a minute for reflection, I felt, by a kind of
instinct, that I must conceal my experiences from my Wife.  Not that I
apprehended, at the moment, any danger from her divulging my secret,
but I knew that to any Woman in Flatland the narrative of my adventures
must needs be unintelligible.  So I endeavoured to reassure her by some
story, invented for the occasion, that I had accidentally fallen
through the trap-door of the cellar, and had there lain stunned.

The Southward attraction in our country is so slight that even to a
Woman my tale necessarily appeared extraordinary and well-nigh
incredible; but my Wife, whose good sense far exceeds that of the
average of her Sex, and who perceived that I was unusually excited, did
not argue with me on the subject, but insisted that I was ill and
required repose.  I was glad of an excuse for retiring to my chamber to
think quietly over what had happened.  When I was at last by myself, a
drowsy sensation fell on me; but before my eyes closed I endeavoured to
reproduce the Third Dimension, and especially the process by which a
Cube is constructed through the motion of a Square.  It was not so
clear as I could have wished; but I remembered that it must be "Upward,
and yet not Northward," and I determined steadfastly to retain these
words as the clue which, if firmly grasped, could not fail to guide me
to the solution.  So mechanically repeating, like a charm, the words,
"Upward, yet not Northward," I fell into a sound refreshing sleep.

During my slumber I had a dream.  I thought I was once more by the side
of the Sphere, whose lustrous hue betokened that he had exchanged his
wrath against me for perfectly placability.  We were moving together
towards a bright but infinitesimally small Point, to which my Master
directed my attention.  As we approached, methought there issued from
it a slight humming noise as from one of your Spaceland bluebottles,
only less resonant by far, so slight indeed that even in the perfect
stillness of the Vacuum through which we soared, the sound reached not
our ears till we checked our flight at a distance from it of something
under twenty human diagonals.

"Look yonder," said my Guide, "in Flatland thou hast lived; of Lineland
thou hast received a vision; thou hast soared with me to the heights of
Spaceland; now, in order to complete the range of thy experience, I
conduct thee downward to the lowest depth of existence, even to the
realm of Pointland, the Abyss of No dimensions.

"Behold yon miserable creature.  That Point is a Being like ourselves,
but confined to the non-dimensional Gulf.  He is himself his own World,
his own Universe; of any other than himself he can form no conception;
he knows not Length, nor Breadth, nor Height, for he has had no
experience of them; he has no cognizance even of the number Two; nor
has he a thought of Plurality; for he is himself his One and All, being
really Nothing.  Yet mark his perfect self-contentment, and hence learn
his lesson, that to be self-contented is to be vile and ignorant, and
that to aspire is better than to be blindly and impotently happy.  Now
listen."

He ceased; and there arose from the little buzzing creature a tiny,
low, monotonous, but distinct tinkling, as from one of your Spaceland
phonographs, from which I caught these words, "Infinite beatitude of
existence!  It is; and there is nothing else beside It."

"What," said I, "does the puny creature mean by 'it'?"  "He means
himself," said the Sphere:  "have you not noticed before now, that
babies and babyish people who cannot distinguish themselves from the
world, speak of themselves in the Third Person?  But hush!"

"It fills all Space," continued the little soliloquizing Creature, "and
what It fills, It is.  What It thinks, that It utters; and what It
utters, that It hears; and It itself is Thinker, Utterer, Hearer,
Thought, Word, Audition; it is the One, and yet the All in All.  Ah,
the happiness, ah, the happiness of Being!"

"Can you not startle the little thing out of its complacency?" said I.
"Tell it what it really is, as you told me; reveal to it the narrow
limitations of Pointland, and lead it up to something higher." "That is
no easy task," said my Master; "try you."

Hereon, raising by voice to the uttermost, I addressed the Point as
follows:

"Silence, silence, contemptible Creature.  You call yourself the All in
All, but you are the Nothing:  your so-called Universe is a mere speck
in a Line, and a Line is a mere shadow as compared with--" "Hush, hush,
you have said enough," interrupted the Sphere, "now listen, and mark
the effect of your harangue on the King of Pointland."

The lustre of the Monarch, who beamed more brightly than ever upon
hearing my words, shewed clearly that he retained his complacency; and
I had hardly ceased when he took up his strain again.  "Ah, the joy,
ah, the joy of Thought!  What can It not achieve by thinking!  Its own
Thought coming to Itself, suggestive of its disparagement, thereby to
enhance Its happiness!  Sweet rebellion stirred up to result in
triumph!  Ah, the divine creative power of the All in One!  Ah, the
joy, the joy of Being!"

"You see," said my Teacher, "how little your words have done.  So far
as the Monarch understand them at all, he accepts them as his own--for
he cannot conceive of any other except himself--and plumes himself upon
the variety of 'Its Thought' as an instance of creative Power.  Let us
leave this God of Pointland to the ignorant fruition of his
omnipresence and omniscience:  nothing that you or I can do can rescue
him from his self-satisfaction."

After this, as we floated gently back to Flatland, I could hear the
mild voice of my Companion pointing the moral of my vision, and
stimulating me to aspire, and to teach others to aspire.  He had been
angered at first--he confessed--by my ambition to soar to Dimensions
above the Third; but, since then, he had received fresh insight, and he
was not too proud to acknowledge his error to a Pupil.  Then he
proceeded to initiate me into mysteries yet higher than those I had
witnessed, shewing me how to construct Extra-Solids by the motion of
Solids, and Double Extra-Solids by the motion of Extra-Solids, and all
"strictly according to Analogy," all by methods so simple, so easy, as
to be patent even to the Female Sex.




21
 How I tried to teach the Theory of Three Dimensions
            to my Grandson, and with what success


I awoke rejoicing, and began to reflect on the glorious career before
me.  I would go forth, methought, at once, and evangelize the whole of
Flatland.  Even to Women and Soldiers should the Gospel of Three
Dimensions be proclaimed.  I would begin with my Wife.

Just as I had decided on the plan of my operations, I heard the sound
of many voices in the street commanding silence.  Then followed a
louder voice.  It was a herald's proclamation.  Listening attentively,
I recognized the words of the Resolution of the Council, enjoining the
arrest, imprisonment, or execution of any one who should pervert the
minds of people by delusions, and by professing to have received
revelations from another World.

I reflected.  This danger was not to be trifled with.  It would be
better to avoid it by omitting all mention of my Revelation, and by
proceeding on the path of Demonstration--which after all, seemed so
simple and so conclusive that nothing would be lost by discarding the
former means.  "Upward, not Northward"--was the clue to the whole
proof.  It had seemed to me fairly clear before I fell asleep; and when
I first awoke, fresh from my dream, it had appeared as patent as
Arithmetic; but somehow it did not seem to me quite so obvious now.
Though my Wife entered the room opportunely at just that moment, I
decided, after we had exchanged a few words of commonplace
conversation, not to begin with her.

My Pentagonal Sons were men of character and standing, and physicians
of no mean reputation, but not great in mathematics, and, in that
respect, unfit for my purpose.  But it occurred to me that a young and
docile Hexagon, with a mathematical turn, would be a most suitable
pupil.  Why therefore not make my first experiment with my little
precocious Grandson, whose casual remarks on the meaning of
three-to-the-third had met with the approval of the Sphere?  Discussing
the matter with him, a mere boy, I should be in perfect safety; for he
would know nothing of the Proclamation of the Council; whereas I could
not feel sure that my Sons--so greatly did their patriotism and
reverence for the Circles predominate over mere blind affection--might
not feel compelled to hand me over to the Prefect, if they found me
seriously maintaining the seditious heresy of the Third Dimension.

But the first thing to be done was to satisfy in some way the curiosity
of my Wife, who naturally wished to know something of the reasons for
which the Circle had desired that mysterious interview, and of the
means by which he had entered the house.  Without entering into the
details of the elaborate account I gave her,--an account, I fear, not
quite so consistent with truth as my Readers in Spaceland might
desire,--I must be content with saying that I succeeded at last in
persuading her to return quietly to her household duties without
eliciting from me any reference to the World of Three Dimensions.  This
done, I immediately sent for my Grandson; for, to confess the truth, I
felt that all that I had seen and heard was in some strange way
slipping away from me, like the image of a half-grasped, tantalizing
dream, and I longed to essay my skill in making a first disciple.

When my Grandson entered the room I carefully secured the door.  Then,
sitting down by his side and taking our mathematical tablets,--or, as
you would call them, Lines--I told him we would resume the lesson of
yesterday.  I taught him once more how a Point by motion in One
Dimension produces a Line, and how a straight Line in Two Dimensions
produces a Square.  After this, forcing a laugh, I said, "And now, you
scamp, you wanted to make believe that a Square may in the same way by
motion 'Upward, not Northward' produce another figure, a sort of extra
square in Three Dimensions.  Say that again, you young rascal."

At this moment we heard once more the herald's "O yes! O yes!" outside
in the street proclaiming the Resolution of the Council.  Young though
he was, my Grandson--who was unusually intelligent for his age, and
bred up in perfect reverence for the authority of the Circles--took in
the situation with an acuteness for which I was quite unprepared.  He
remained silent till the last words of the Proclamation had died away,
and then, bursting into tears, "Dear Grandpapa," he said, "that was
only my fun, and of course I meant nothing at all by it; and we did not
know anything then about the new Law; and I don't think I said anything
about the Third Dimension; and I am sure I did not say one word about
'Upward, not Northward,' for that would be such nonsense, you know.
How could a thing move Upward, and not Northward?  Upward and not
Northward!  Even if I were a baby, I could not be so absurd as that.
How silly it is!  Ha! ha! ha!"

"Not at all silly," said I, losing my temper; "here for example, I take
this Square," and, at the word, I grasped a moveable Square, which was
lying at hand--"and I move it, you see, not Northward but--yes, I move
it Upward--that is to say, Northward but I move it somewhere--not
exactly like this, but somehow--"  Here I brought my sentence to an
inane conclusion, shaking the Square about in a purposeless manner,
much to the amusement of my Grandson, who burst out laughing louder
than ever, and declared that I was not teaching him, but joking with
him; and so saying he unlocked the door and ran out of the room.  Thus
ended my first attempt to convert a pupil to the Gospel of Three
Dimensions.




22
  How I then tried to diffuse the Theory of Three
            Dimensions by other means, and of the result


My failure with my Grandson did not encourage me to communicate my
secret to others of my household; yet neither was I led by it to
despair of success.  Only I saw that I must not wholly rely on the
catch-phrase, "Upward, not Northward," but must rather endeavour to
seek a demonstration by setting before the public a clear view of the
whole subject; and for this purpose it seemed necessary to resort to
writing.

So I devoted several months in privacy to the composition of a treatise
on the mysteries of Three Dimensions.  Only, with the view of evading
the Law, if possible, I spoke not of a physical Dimension, but of a
Thoughtland whence, in theory, a Figure could look down upon Flatland
and see simultaneously the insides of all things, and where it was
possible that there might be supposed to exist a Figure environed, as
it were, with six Squares, and containing eight terminal Points.  But
in writing this book I found myself sadly hampered by the impossibility
of drawing such diagrams as were necessary for my purpose:  for of
course, in our country of Flatland, there are no tablets but Lines, and
no diagrams but Lines, all in one straight Line and only
distinguishable by difference of size and brightness; so that, when I
had finished my treatise (which I entitled, "Through Flatland to
Thoughtland") I could not feel certain that many would understand my
meaning.

Meanwhile my wife was under a cloud.  All pleasures palled upon me; all
sights tantalized and tempted me to outspoken treason, because I could
not compare what I saw in Two Dimensions with what it really was if
seen in Three, and could hardly refrain from making my comparisons
aloud.  I neglected my clients and my own business to give myself to
the contemplation of the mysteries which I had once beheld, yet which I
could impart to no one, and found daily more difficult to reproduce
even before my own mental vision.  One day, about eleven months after
my return from Spaceland, I tried to see a Cube with my eye closed, but
failed; and though I succeeded afterwards, I was not then quite certain
(nor have I been ever afterwards) that I had exactly realized the
original.  This made me more melancholy than before, and determined me
to take some step; yet what, I knew not.  I felt that I would have been
willing to sacrifice my life for the Cause, if thereby I could have
produced conviction.  But if I could not convince my Grandson, how
could I convince the highest and most developed Circles in the land?

And yet at times my spirit was too strong for me, and I gave vent to
dangerous utterances.  Already I was considered heterodox if not
treasonable, and I was keenly alive to the danger of my position;
nevertheless I could not at times refrain from bursting out into
suspicious or half-seditious utterances, even among the highest
Polygonal or Circular society.  When, for example, the question arose
about the treatment of those lunatics who said that they had received
the power of seeing the insides of things, I would quote the saying of
an ancient Circle, who declared that prophets and inspired people are
always considered by the majority to be mad; and I could not help
occasionally dropping such expressions as "the eye that discerns the
interiors of things," and "the all-seeing land"; once or twice I even
let fall the forbidden terms "the Third and Fourth Dimensions." At
last, to complete a series of minor indiscretions, at a meeting of our
Local Speculative Society held at the palace of the Prefect
himself,--some extremely silly person having read an elaborate paper
exhibiting the precise reasons why Providence has limited the number of
Dimensions to Two, and why the attribute of omnividence is assigned to
the Supreme alone--I so far forgot myself as to give an exact account
of the whole of my voyage with the Sphere into Space, and to the
Assembly Hall in our Metropolis, and then to Space again, and of my
return home, and of everything that I had seen and heard in fact or
vision.  At first, indeed, I pretended that I was describing the
imaginary experiences of a fictitious person; but my enthusiasm soon
forced me to throw off all disguise, and finally, in a fervent
peroration, I exhorted all my hearers to divest themselves of prejudice
and to become believers in the Third Dimension.

Need I say that I was at once arrested and taken before the Council?

Next morning, standing in the very place where but a very few months
ago the Sphere had stood in my company, I was allowed to begin and to
continue my narration unquestioned and uninterrupted.  But from the
first I foresaw my fate; for the President, noting that a guard of the
better sort of Policemen was in attendance, of angularity little, if at
all, under 55 degrees, ordered them to be relieved before I began my
defence, by an inferior class of 2 or 3 degrees.  I knew only too well
what that meant.  I was to be executed or imprisoned, and my story was
to be kept secret from the world by the simultaneous destruction of the
officials who had heard it; and, this being the case, the President
desired to substitute the cheaper for the more expensive victims.

After I had concluded my defence, the President, perhaps perceiving
that some of the junior Circles had been moved by evident earnestness,
asked me two questions:--

1.  Whether I could indicate the direction which I meant when I used
the words "Upward, not Northward"?

2.  Whether I could by any diagrams or descriptions (other than the
enumeration of imaginary sides and angles) indicate the Figure I was
pleased to call a Cube?

I declared that I could say nothing more, and that I must commit myself
to the Truth, whose cause would surely prevail in the end.

The President replied that he quite concurred in my sentiment, and that
I could not do better.  I must be sentenced to perpetual imprisonment;
but if the Truth intended that I should emerge from prison and
evangelize the world, the Truth might be trusted to bring that result
to pass.  Meanwhile I should be subjected to no discomfort that was not
necessary to preclude escape, and, unless I forfeited the privilege by
misconduct, I should be occasionally permitted to see my brother who
had preceded me to my prison.

Seven years have elapsed and I am still a prisoner, and--if I except
the occasional visits of my brother--debarred from all companionship
save that of my jailers.  My brother is one of the best of Squares,
just, sensible, cheerful, and not without fraternal affection; yet I
confess that my weekly interviews, at least in one respect, cause me
the bitterest pain.  He was present when the Sphere manifested himself
in the Council Chamber; he saw the Sphere's changing sections; he heard
the explanation of the phenomena then give to the Circles.  Since that
time, scarcely a week has passed during seven whole years, without his
hearing from me a repetition of the part I played in that
manifestation, together with ample descriptions of all the phenomena in
Spaceland, and the arguments for the existence of Solid things
derivable from Analogy.  Yet--I take shame to be forced to confess
it--my brother has not yet grasped the nature of Three Dimensions, and
frankly avows his disbelief in the existence of a Sphere.

Hence I am absolutely destitute of converts, and, for aught that I can
see, the millennial Revelation has been made to me for nothing.
Prometheus up in Spaceland was bound for bringing down fire for
mortals, but I--poor Flatland Prometheus--lie here in prison for
bringing down nothing to my countrymen.  Yet I existing the hope that
these memoirs, in some manner, I know not how, may find their way to
the minds of humanity in Some Dimension, and may stir up a race of
rebels who shall refuse to be confined to limited Dimensionality.

That is the hope of my brighter moments.  Alas, it is not always so.
Heavily weights on me at times the burdensome reflection that I cannot
honestly say I am confident as to the exact shape of the once-seen,
oft-regretted Cube; and in my nightly visions the mysterious precept,
"Upward, not Northward," haunts me like a soul-devouring Sphinx.  It is
part of the martyrdom which I endure for the cause of Truth that there
are seasons of mental weakness, when Cubes and Spheres flit away into
the background of scarce-possible existences; when the Land of Three
Dimensions seems almost as visionary as the Land of One or None; nay,
when even this hard wall that bars me from my freedom, these very
tablets on which I am writing, and all the substantial realities of
Flatland itself, appear no better than the offspring of a diseased
imagination, or the baseless fabric of a dream.

_BOOKEND_

They stood together at the parapet, their arms about each other's
waists, her head against his cheek. Behind, the broad leaved
shrubbery gossiped softly with the wind, and from the lower main
terrace came music and laughing voices. The city of Wardshaven
spread in front of them, white buildings rising from the wide spaces
of green treetops, under a shimmer of sun-reflecting aircars above.
Far away, the mountains were violet in the afternoon haze, and the
huge red sun hung in a sky as yellow as a ripe peach.

His eye caught a twinkle ten miles to the southwest, and for an
instant he was puzzled. Then he frowned. The sunlight on the two
thousand-foot globe of Duke Angus' new ship, the _Enterprise_, back
at the Gorram shipyards after her final trial cruise. He didn't want
to think about that, now.

Instead, he pressed the girl closer and whispered her name, "Elaine,"
and then, caressing every syllable, "Lady Elaine Trask of Traskon."

"Oh, no, Lucas!" Her protest was half joking and half apprehensive.
"It's bad luck to be called by your married name before the wedding."

"I've been calling you that in my mind since the night of the Duke's
ball, when you were just home from school on Excalibur."

She looked up from the corner of her eye.

"That was when I started calling me that, too," she confessed.

"There's a terrace to the west at Traskon New House," he told her.
"Tomorrow, we'll have our dinner there, and watch the sunset together."

"I know. I thought that was to be our sunset-watching place."

"You have been peeking," he accused. "Traskon New House was to be
your surprise."

"I always was a present-peeker, New Year's and my birthdays. But I only
saw it from the air. I'll be very surprised at everything inside,"
she promised. "And very delighted."

And when she'd seen everything and Traskon New House wasn't a surprise
any more, they'd take a long space trip. He hadn't mentioned that to
her, yet. To some of the other Sword-Worlds--Excalibur, of course, and
Morglay and Flamberge and Durendal. No, not Durendal; the war had
started there again. But they'd have so much fun. And she would see
clear blue skies again, and stars at night. The cloud-veil hid the stars
from Gram, and Elaine had missed them, since coming home from Excalibur.

The shadow of an aircar fell briefly upon them and they looked up
and turned their heads, in time to see it sink with graceful dignity
toward the landing-stage of Karval House, and he glimpsed its
blazonry--sword and atom-symbol, the badge of the ducal house of
Ward. He wondered if it were Duke Angus himself, or just some of
his people come ahead of him. They should get back to their guests,
he supposed. Then he took her in his arms and kissed her, and she
responded ardently. It must have been all of five minutes since
they'd done that before.

       *       *       *       *       *

A slight cough behind them brought them apart and their heads
around. It was Sesar Karvall, gray-haired and portly, the breast of
his blue coat gleaming with orders and decorations and the sapphire
in the pommel of his dress-dagger twinkling.

"I thought I'd find you two here," Elaine's father smiled. "You'll
have tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow together, but need I remind
you that today we have guests, and more coming every minute."

"Who came in the Ward car?" Elaine asked.

"Rovard Grauffis. And Otto Harkaman; you never met him, did you, Lucas?"

"No; not by introduction. I'd like to, before he spaces out." He had
nothing against Harkaman personally; only against what he represented.
"Is the Duke coming?"

"Oh, surely. Lionel of Newhaven and the Lord of Northport are coming
with him. They're at the Palace now." Karvall hesitated. "His nephew's
back in town."

Elaine was distressed; she started to say: "Oh, dear! I hope he doesn't--"

"Has Dunnan been bothering Elaine again?"

"Nothing to take notice of. He was here, yesterday, demanding to
speak with her. We got him to leave without too much unpleasantness."

"It'll be something for me to take notice of, if he keeps it up
after tomorrow."

For his seconds and Andray Dunnan's, that was; he hoped it wouldn't
come to that. He didn't want to have to shoot a kinsman to the house
of Ward, and a crazy man to boot.

"I'm terribly sorry for him," Elaine was saying. "Father, you should
have let me talk to him. I might have made him understand."

Sesar Karvall was shocked. "Child, you couldn't have subjected
yourself to that! The man is insane!" Then he saw her bare
shoulders, and was even more shocked. "Elaine, your shawl!"

Her hands went up and couldn't find it; she looked about in confused
embarrassment. Amused, Lucas picked it from the shrub onto which she
had tossed it and draped it over her shoulders, his hands lingering
briefly. Then he gestured to the older man to precede them, and
they entered the arbored walk. At the other end, in an open circle,
a fountain played; white marble girls and boys bathing in the
jade-green basin. Another piece of loot from one of the Old Federation
planets; that was something he'd tried to avoid in furnishing
Traskon New House. There'd be a lot of that coming to Gram, after
Otto Harkaman took the _Enterprise_ to space.

"I'll have to come back, some time, and visit them," Elaine
whispered to him. "They'll miss me."

"You'll find a lot of new friends at your new home," he whispered
back. "You wait till tomorrow."

"I'm going to put a word in the Duke's ear about that fellow," Sesar
Karvall, still thinking of Dunnan, was saying. "If he speaks to him,
maybe it'll do some good."

"I doubt it. I don't think Duke Angus has any influence over him at all."

Dunnan's mother had been the Duke's younger sister; from his father
he had inherited what had originally been a prosperous barony. Now
it was mortgaged to the top of the manor-house aerial-mast. The Duke
had once assumed Dunnan's debts, and refused to do so again. Dunnan
had gone to space a few times, as a junior officer on trade-and-raid
voyages into the Old Federation. He was supposed to be a fair
astrogator. He had expected his uncle to give him command of the
_Enterprise_, which had been ridiculous. Disappointed in that,
he had recruited a mercenary company and was seeking military
employment: It was suspected that he was in correspondence with
his uncle's worst enemy, Duke Omfray of Glaspyth.

And he was obsessively in love with Elaine Karvall, a passion which
seemed to nourish itself on its own hopelessness. Maybe it would
be a good idea to take that space trip right away. There ought to
be a ship leaving Bigglersport for one of the other Sword-Worlds,
before long.

       *       *       *       *       *

They paused at the head of the escalators; the garden below was
thronged with guests, the bright shawls of the ladies and the coats
of the men making shifting color-patterns among the flower-beds and
on the lawns and under the trees. Serving-robots, flame-yellow and
black in the Karvall colors, floated about playing soft music and
offering refreshments. There was a continuous spiral of changing
costume-color around the circular robo-table. Voices babbled happily
like a mountain river.

As they stood looking down, another aircar circled low; green and
gold, lettered PANPLANET NEWS SERVICE. Sesar Karvall swore in
irritation.

"Didn't there use to be something they called privacy?" he asked.

"It's a big story, Sesar."

It was; more than the marriage of two people who happened to be in love
with each other. It was the marriage of the farming and ranching barony
of Traskon and the Karvall steel mills. More, it was public announcement
that the wealth and fighting-men of both baronies were now aligned
behind Duke Angus of Wardshaven. So it was a general holiday. Every
industry had closed down at noon today, and would be closed until
morning-after-next, and there would be dancing in every park and
feasting in every tavern. To Sword-Worlders, any excuse for a holiday
was better than none.

"They're our people, Sesar; they have a right to have a good time
with us. I know everybody at Traskon is watching this by screen."

He raised his hand and waved to the news car, and when it swung
its pickup around, he waved again. Then they went down the long
escalator.

Lady Lavina Karvall was the center of a cluster of matrons and
dowagers, around which tomorrow's bridesmaids fluttered like
many-colored butterflies. She took possession of her daughter
and dragged her into the feminine circle. He saw Rovard Grauffis,
small and saturnine, Duke Angus' henchman, and Burt Sandrasan,
Lady Lavina's brother. They spoke, and then an upper-servant,
his tabard blazoned with the yellow flame and black hammer of
Karvall mills, approached his master with some tale of domestic
crisis, and the two went away together.

"You haven't met Captain Harkaman, Lucas," Rovard Grauffis said.
"I wish you'd come over and say hello and have a drink with him.
I know your attitude, but he's a good sort. Personally, I wish
we had a few like him around here."

That was his main objection. There were fewer and fewer men of
that sort on any of the Sword-Worlds.




II


A dozen men clustered around the bartending robot--his cousin
and family lawyer, Nikkolay Trask; Lothar Ffayle, the banker;
Alex Gorram, the shipbuilder, and his son Basil; Baron Rathmore;
more of the Wardshaven nobles whom he knew only distantly.
And Otto Harkaman.

Harkaman was a Space Viking. That would have set him apart, even
if he hadn't topped the tallest of them by a head. He wore a short
black jacket, heavily gold-braided, and black trousers inside
ankle-boots; the dagger on his belt was no mere dress-ornament. His
tousled red-brown hair was long enough to furnish extra padding in
a combat-helmet, and his beard was cut square at the bottom.

He had been fighting on Durendal, for one of the branches of the
royal house contesting fratricidally for the throne. The wrong one;
he had lost his ship, and most of his men and, almost, his own life.
He had been a penniless refugee on Flamberge, owning only the
clothes he stood in and his personal weapons and the loyalty of
half a dozen adventurers as penniless as himself, when Duke Angus
had invited him to Gram to command the _Enterprise_.

"A pleasure, Lord Trask. I've met your lovely bride-to-be, and
now that I meet you, let me congratulate both." Then, as they
were having a drink together, he put his foot in it by asking:
"You're not an investor in the Tanith Adventure, are you?"

He said he wasn't, and would have let it go at that. Young Basil
Gorram had to get his foot in, too.

"Lord Trask does not approve of the Tanith Adventure," he said
scornfully. "He thinks we should stay home and produce wealth,
instead of exporting robbery and murder to the Old Federation
for it."

The smile remained on Otto Harkaman's face; only the friendliness
was gone. He unobtrusively shifted his drink to his left hand.

"Well, our operations are definable as robbery and murder," he
agreed. "Space Vikings are professional robbers and murderers.
And you object? Perhaps you find me personally objectionable?"

"I wouldn't have shaken your hand or had a drink with you if I did.
I don't care how many planets you raid or cities you sack, or how
many innocents, if that's what they are, you massacre in the Old
Federation. You couldn't possibly do anything worse than those
people have been doing to one another for the past ten centuries.
What I object to is the way you're raiding the Sword-Worlds."

"You're crazy!" Basil Gorram exploded.

"Young man," Harkaman reproved, "the conversation was between Lord
Trask and myself. And when somebody makes a statement you don't
understand, don't tell him he's crazy. Ask him what he means.
What _do_ you mean, Lord Trask?"

"You should know; you've just raided Gram for eight hundred of our
best men. You raided me for close to forty vaqueros, farm-workers,
lumbermen, machine-operators, and I doubt I'll be able to replace
them with as good." He turned to the elder Gorram. "Alex, how many
have you lost to Captain Harkaman?"

Gorram tried to make it a dozen; pressed, he admitted to a score and
a half. Roboticians, machine-supervisors, programmers, a couple of
engineers, a foreman. There was grudging agreement from the others.
Burt Sandrasan's engine-works had lost almost as many, of the same
kind. Even Lothar Ffayle admitted to losing a computerman and
a guard-sergeant.

And after they were gone, the farms and ranches and factories would
go on, almost but not quite as before. Nothing on Gram, nothing on
any of the Sword-Worlds, was done as efficiently as three centuries
ago. The whole level of Sword-World life was sinking, like the east
coastline of this continent, so slowly as to be evident only from
the records and monuments of the past. He said as much, and added:

"And the genetic loss. The best Sword-World genes are literally
escaping to space, like the atmosphere of a low-gravity planet,
each generation begotten by fathers slightly inferior to the last.
It wasn't so bad when the Space Vikings raided directly from the
Sword-Worlds; they got home once in a while. Now they're conquering
planets in the Old Federation for bases, and staying there."

       *       *       *       *       *

Everybody had begun to relax; this wouldn't be a quarrel. Harkaman,
who had shifted his drink back to his right hand, chuckled.

"That's right. I've fathered my share of brats in the Old
Federation, and I know Space Vikings whose fathers were born on
Old Federation planets." He turned to Basil Gorram. "You see, the
gentleman isn't crazy, at all. That's what happened to the Terran
Federation, by the way. The good men all left to colonize, and the
stuffed shirts and yes-men and herd-followers and safety-firsters
stayed on Terra and tried to govern the galaxy."

"Well, maybe this is all new to you, captain," Rovard Grauffis
said sourly, "but Lucas Trask's dirge for the Decline and Fall
of the Sword-Worlds is an old song to the rest of us. I have
too much to do to stay here and argue."

Lothar Ffayle evidently did intend to stay and argue.

"All you're saying, Lucas, is that we're expanding. You want us
to sit here and build up population pressure like Terra in the
First Century?"

"With three and a half billion people spread out on twelve planets?
They had that many on Terra alone. And it took us eight centuries
to reach that."

That had been since the Ninth Century, Atomic Era, at the end of
the Big War. Ten thousand men and women on Abigor, refusing to
surrender, had taken the remnant of the System States Alliance navy
to space, seeking a world the Federation had never heard of and
wouldn't find for a long time. That had been the world they had
called Excalibur. From it, their grandchildren had colonized Joyeuse
and Durendal and Flamberge; Haulteclere had been colonized in the
next generation from Joyeuse, and Gram from Haulteclere.

"We're not expanding, Lothar; we're contracting. We stopped
expanding three hundred and fifty years ago, when that ship came
back to Morglay from the Old Federation and reported what had
been happening out there since the Big War. Before that, we were
discovering new planets and colonizing them. Since then, we've
been picking the bones of the dead Terran Federation."

       *       *       *       *       *

Something was going on by the escalators to the landing stage.
People were moving excitedly in that direction, and the news cars
were circling like vultures over a sick cow. Harkaman wondered,
hopefully, if it mightn't be a fight.

"Some drunk being bounced." Nikkolay, Lucas' cousin, commented.
"Sesar's let all Wardshaven in here, today. But, Lucas, this Tanith
adventure; we're not making any hit-and-run raid. We're taking over
a whole planet; it'll be another Sword-World in forty or fifty
years."

[Illustration]

"Inside another century, we'll conquer the whole Federation," Baron
Rathmore declared. He was a politician and never let exaggeration
worry him.

"What I don't understand," Harkaman said, "is why you support Duke
Angus, Lord Trask, if you think the Tanith adventure is doing Gram
so much harm."

[Illustration]

"If Angus didn't do it, somebody else would. But Angus is going to
make himself King of Gram, and I don't think anybody else could do
that. This planet needs a single sovereignty. I don't know how much
you've seen of it outside this duchy, but don't take Wardshaven as
typical. Some of these duchies, like Glaspyth or Didreksburg, are
literal snake pits. All the major barons are at each other's
throats, and they can't even keep their own knights and petty-barons
in order. Why, there's a miserable little war down in Southmain
Continent that's been going on for over two centuries."

"That's probably where Dunnan's going to take that army of his,"
a robot-manufacturing baron said. "I hope it gets wiped out, and
Dunnan with it."

"You don't have to go to Southmain; just go to Glaspyth," somebody
else said.

"Well, if we don't get a planetary monarchy to keep order, this
planet will decivilize like anything in the Old Federation."

"Oh, _come_, Lucas!" Alex Gorram protested. "That's pulling it out
too far."

"Yes, for one thing, we don't have the Neobarbarians," somebody
said. "And if they ever came out here, we'd blow them to
Em-See-Square in nothing flat. Might be a good thing if they
did, too; it would stop us squabbling among ourselves."

Harkaman looked at him in surprise. "Just who do you think the
Neobarbarians are, anyhow?" he asked. "Some race of invading nomads;
Attila's Huns in spaceships?"

"Well, isn't that who they are?" Gorram asked.

"Nifflheim, no! There aren't a dozen and a half planets in the Old
Federation that still have hyperdrive, and they're all civilized.
That's if 'civilized' is what Gilgamesh is," he added. "These are
homemade barbarians. Workers and peasants who revolted to seize and
divide the wealth and then found they'd smashed the means of
production and killed off all the technical brains. Survivors on
planets hit during the Interstellar Wars, from the Eleventh to
the Thirteenth Centuries, who lost the machinery of civilization.
Followers of political leaders on local-dictatorship planets.
Companies of mercenaries thrown out of employment and living by
pillage. Religious fanatics following self-anointed prophets."

"You think we don't have plenty of Neobarbarian material here on
Gram?" Trask demanded. "If you do, take a look around."

Glaspyth, somebody said.

"That collection of over-ripe gallows-fruit Andray Dunnan's
recruited," Rathmore mentioned.

Alex Gorram was grumbling that his shipyard was full of them;
agitators stirring up trouble, trying to organize a strike to
get rid of the robots.

"Yes," Harkaman pounced on that last. "I know of at least forty
instances, on a dozen and a half planets, in the last eight
centuries, of anti-technological movements. They had them on Terra,
back as far as the Second Century Pre-Atomic. And after Venus
seceded from the First Federation, before the Second Federation
was organized."

"You're interested in history?" Rathmore asked.

"A hobby. All spacemen have hobbies. There's very little work
aboard ship in hyperspace; boredom is the worst enemy. My
guns-and-missiles officer, Vann Larch, is a painter. Most of his
work was lost with the _Corisande_ on Durendal, but he kept us from
starving a few times on Flamberge by painting pictures and selling
them. My hyperspatial astrogator, Guatt Kirbey, composes music; he
tries to express the mathematics of hyperspatial theory in musical
terms. I don't care much for it, myself," he admitted. "I study
history. You know, it's odd; practically everything that's happened
on any of the inhabited planets happened on Terra before the first
spaceship."

The garden immediately around them was quiet, now; everybody was
over by the landing-stage escalators. Harkaman would have said more,
but at that moment he saw half a dozen of Sesar Karvall's uniformed
guardsmen run past. They were helmeted and in bullet-proofs; one of
them had an auto-rifle, and the rest carried knobbed plastic
truncheons. The Space Viking set down his drink.

"Let's go," he said. "Our host is calling up his troops; I think
the guests ought to find battle-stations, too."




III


The gaily-dressed crowd formed a semicircle facing the landing-stage
escalators; everybody was staring in embarrassed curiosity, those
behind craning over the shoulders of those in front. The ladies had
drawn up their shawls in frigid formality; many had even covered
their heads. There were four news-service cars hovering above;
whatever was going on was getting a planetwide screen showing. The
Karvall guardsmen were trying to get through; their sergeant was
saying, over and over, "Please, ladies and gentlemen; your pardon,
noble sir," and getting nowhere.

Otto Harkaman swore disgustedly and shoved the sergeant aside.
"Make way, here!" he bellowed. "Let these guards pass." With that,
he almost hurled a gaily-dressed gentleman aside on either hand;
they both turned to glare angrily, then got hastily out of his way.
Meditating briefly on the uses of bad manners in an emergency, Trask
followed, with the others; the big Space Viking plowed to the front,
where Sesar Karvall and Rovard Grauffis and several others were standing.

Facing them, four men in black cloaks stood with their backs to
the escalators. Two were commonfolk retainers; hired gunmen, to be
precise. They were at pains to keep their hands plainly in sight,
and seemed to be wishing themselves elsewhere. The man in front wore
a diamond sunburst jewel on his beret, and his cloak was lined with
pale blue silk. His thin, pointed face was deeply lined about the
mouth and penciled with a thin black mustache. His eyes showed
white all around the irises, and now and then his mouth would twitch
in an involuntary grimace. Andray Dunnan; Trask wondered briefly how
soon he would have to look at him from twenty-five meters over the
sights of a pistol. The face of the slightly taller man who stood at
his shoulder was paper-white, expressionless, with a black beard.
His name was Nevil Ormm, nobody was quite sure whence he had come,
and he was Dunnan's henchman and constant companion.

"You lie!" Dunnan was shouting. "You lie damnably, in your stinking
teeth, all of you! You've intercepted every message she's tried to
send me."

"My daughter has sent you no messages, Lord Dunnan," Sesar Karvall
said, with forced patience. "None but the one I just gave you, that
she wants nothing whatever to do with you."

"You think I believe that? You're holding her a prisoner; Satan
only knows how you've been torturing her to force her into this
abominable marriage--"

There was a stir among the bystanders; that was more than
well-mannered restraint could stand. Out of the murmur of
incredulous voices, one woman's was quite audible:

"Well, really! He actually _is_ crazy!"

Dunnan, like everybody else, heard it. "Crazy, am I?" he blazed.
"Because I can see through this hypocritical sham? Here's Lucas
Trask, he wants an interest in Karvall mills, and here's Sesar
Karvall, he wants access to iron deposits on Traskon land. And
my loving uncle, he wants the help of both of them in stealing
Omfray of Glaspyth's duchy. And here's this loan-shark of a Ffayle,
trying to claw my lands away from me, and Rovard Grauffis, the fetchdog
of my uncle who won't lift a finger to save his kinsman from ruin,
and this foreigner Harkaman who's swindled me out of command of
the _Enterprise_. You're all plotting against me--"

"Sir Nevil," Grauffis said, "you can see that Lord Dunnan's not
himself. If you're a good friend to him, you'll get him out of here
before Duke Angus arrives."

Ormm leaned forward and spoke urgently in Dunnan's ear. Dunnan
pushed him angrily away.

"Great Satan, are you against me, too?" he demanded.

Ormm caught his arm. "You fool, do you want to ruin everything,
now--" He lowered his voice; the rest was inaudible.

"No, curse you, I won't go till I've spoken to her, face to face--"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was another stir among the spectators; the crowd was parting,
and Elaine was coming through, followed by her mother and Lady
Sandrasan and five or six other matrons. They all had their shawls
over their heads, right ends over left shoulders; they all stopped
except Elaine, who took a few steps forward and confronted Andray
Dunnan. He had never seen her look more beautiful, but it was the
icy beauty of a honed dagger.

"Lord Dunnan, what do you wish to say to me?" she asked. "Say it
quickly and then go; you are not welcome here."

"Elaine!" Dunnan cried, taking a step forward. "Why do you cover
your head; why do you speak to me as a stranger? I am Andray,
who loves you. Why are you letting them force you into this
wicked marriage?"

"No one is forcing me; I am marrying Lord Trask willingly and
happily, because I love him. Now, please, go and make no more
trouble at my wedding."

"That's a lie! They're making you say that! You don't have to marry
him; they can't make you. Come with me now. They won't dare stop
you. I'll take you away from all these cruel, greedy people. You
love me, you've always loved me. You've told me you loved me,
again and again--"

Yes, in his own private dream-world, a world of fantasy that had now
become Andray Dunnan's reality, in which an Elaine Karvall whom his
imagination had created existed only to love him. Confronted by the
real Elaine, he simply rejected the reality.

"I never loved you, Lord Dunnan, and I never told you so. I never
hated you, either, but you are making it very hard for me not to.
Now go, and never let me see you again."

With that, she turned and started back through the crowd, which
parted in front of her. Her mother and her aunt and the other ladies
followed.

"You lied to me!" Dunnan shrieked after her. "You lied all the time.
You're as bad as the rest of them, all scheming and plotting against
me, betraying me. I know what it's about; you all want to cheat me
of my rights, and keep my usurping uncle on the ducal throne. And
you, you false-hearted harlot, you're the worst of them all!"

Sir Nevil Ormm caught his shoulder and spun him around, propelling
him toward the escalators. Dunnan struggled, screaming inarticulately
like a wounded wolf. Ormm was cursing furiously.

"You two!" he shouted. "Help me, here. Get hold of him."

Dunnan was still howling as they forced him onto the escalator, the
backs of the two retainers' cloaks, badged with the Dunnan crescent,
light blue on black, hiding him. After a little, an aircar with the
blue crescent blazonry lifted and sped away.

"Lucas, he's crazy," Sesar Karvall was insisting. "Elaine hasn't
spoken fifty words to him since he came back from his last voyage--"

He laughed and put a hand on Karvall's shoulder. "I know that,
Sesar. You don't think, do you, that I need assurance of it?"

"Crazy, I'll say he's crazy," Rovard Grauffis put in. "Did you
hear what he said about his rights? Wait till his Grace hears
about that."

"Does he lay claim to the ducal throne, Sir Rovard?" Otto Harkaman
asked, sharply and seriously.

"Oh, he claims that his mother was born a year and a half before
Duke Angus and the true date of her birth falsified to give Angus
the succession. Why, his present Grace was three years old when she
was born. I was old Duke Fergus' esquire; I carried Angus on my
shoulder when Andray Dunnan's mother was presented to the lords
and barons the day after she was born."

"Of course he's crazy," Alex Gorram agreed. "I don't know why
the Duke doesn't have him put under psychiatric treatment."

"I'd put him under treatment," Harkaman said, drawing a finger
across under his beard. "Crazy men who pretend to thrones are bombs
that ought to be deactivated, before they blow things up."

"We couldn't do that," Grauffis said. "After all, he's Duke Angus'
nephew--"

"I could do it," Harkaman said. "He only has three hundred men in
this company of his. Why you people ever let him recruit them Satan
only knows," he parenthesized. "I have eight hundred; five hundred
ground-fighters. I'd like to see how they shape up in combat, before
we space out. I can have them ready for action in two hours, and
it'd be all over before midnight."

"No, Captain Harkaman; his Grace would never permit it," Grauffis
vetoed. "You have no idea of the political harm that would do among
the independent lords on whom we're counting for support. You
weren't here on Gram when Duke Ridgerd of Didreksburg had his sister
Sancia's second husband poisoned--"




IV


They halted under the colonnade; beyond, the lower main terrace was
crowded, and a medley of old love songs was wafting from the sound
outlets, for the sixth or eighth time around. He looked at his
watch; it was ninety seconds later than the last time he had done
so. Give it fifteen more minutes to get started, and another fifteen
to get away after the marriage toasts and the felicitations. And
no marriage, however pompous, lasted more than half an hour. An
hour, then, till he and Elaine would be in the aircar, bulleting
toward Traskon.

The love songs stopped abruptly; after a momentary silence, a
trumpet, considerably amplified, blared; the "Ducal Salute." The
crowd stopped shifting, the buzz of voices ceased. At the head of
the landing-stage escalators there was a glow of color and the ducal
party began moving down. A platoon of guards in red and yellow, with
gilded helmets and tasseled halberds. An esquire bearing the Sword
of State. Duke Angus, with his council, Otto Harkaman among them;
the Duchess Flavia and her companion-ladies. The household gentlemen,
and their ladies. More guardsmen. There was a great burst of cheering;
the news-service aircars got into position above the procession.
Cousin Nikkolay and a few others stepped out from between the pillars
into the sunlight; there was a similar movement at the other side of
the terrace. The ducal party reached the end of the central walkway,
halted and deployed.

"All right; let's shove off," Cousin Nikkolay said, stepping forward.

Ten minutes since they had come outside; another five to get into
position. Fifty minutes, now, till he and Elaine--Lady Elaine Trask
of Traskon, for real and for always--would be going home.

"Sure the car's ready?" he asked, for the hundredth time.

His cousin assured him that it was. Figures in Karvall black and
flame-yellow appeared across the terrace. The music began again,
this time the stately "Nobles' Wedding March," arrogant and at
the same time tender. Sesar Karvall's gentleman-secretary, and
the Karvall lawyer; executives of the steel mills, the Karvall
guard-captain. Sesar himself, with Elaine on his arm; she was
wearing a shawl of black and yellow. He looked around in sudden
fright; "For the love of Satan, where's our shawl?" he demanded, and
then relaxed when one of his gentlemen exhibited it, green and tawny
in Traskon colors. The bridesmaids, led by Lady Lavina Karvall.
Finally they halted, ten yards apart, in front of the Duke.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Who approaches us?" Duke Angus asked of his guard-captain.

He had a thin, pointed face, almost femininely sensitive, and a
small pointed beard. He was bareheaded except for the narrow golden
circlet which he spent most of his waking time scheming to convert
into a royal crown. The guard-captain repeated the question.

"I am Sir Nikkolay Trask; I bring my cousin and liege-lord,
Lucas, Lord Trask, Baron of Traskon. He comes to receive the
Lady-Demoiselle Elaine, daughter of Lord Sesar Karvall, Baron
of Karvall mills, and the sanction of your Grace to the marriage
between them."

Sir Maxamon Zhorgay, Sesar Karvall's henchman, named himself and
his lord; they brought the Lady-Demoiselle Elaine to be wed to
Lord Trask of Traskon. The Duke, satisfied that these were persons
whom he could address directly, asked if the terms of the
marriage-agreement had been reached; both parties affirmed this.
Sir Maxamon passed a scroll to the Duke; Duke Angus began to read
the stiff and precise legal phraseology.

Marriages between noble houses were not matters to be left open
to dispute; a great deal of spilled blood and burned powder had
resulted from ambiguity on some point of succession or inheritance
or dower rights. Lucas bore it patiently; he didn't want his
great-grandchildren and Elaine's shooting it out over a matter
of a misplaced comma.

"And these persons here before us do enter into this marriage
freely?" the Duke asked, when the reading had ended. He stepped
forward as he spoke, and his esquire gave him the two-hand Sword of
State, heavy enough to behead a bisonoid. Trask stepped forward;
Sesar Karvall brought Elaine up. The lawyers and henchmen obliqued
off to the sides. "How say you, Lord Trask?" he asked, almost
conversationally.

"With all my heart, your Grace."

"And you, Lady-Demoiselle Elaine?"

"It is my dearest wish, your Grace."

The Duke took the sword by the blade and extended it; they laid
their hands on the jeweled pommel.

"And do you, and your houses, avow us, Angus, Duke of Wardshaven,
to be your sovereign prince, and pledge fealty to us and to our
legitimate and lawful successors?"

"We do." Not only he and Elaine, but all around them, and all the
throng in the gardens, answered, the spectators in shouts. Very
clearly, above it all, somebody, with more enthusiasm than
discretion, was bawling: "_Long live Angus the First of Gram!_"

"And we, Angus, do confer upon you two, and your houses, the right
to wear our badge as you see fit, and pledge ourself to maintain
your rights against any and all who may presume to invade them. And
we declare that this marriage between you two, and this agreement
between your respective houses, does please us, and we avow you two,
Lucas and Elaine, to be lawfully wed, and who so questions this
marriage challenges us, in our teeth and to our despite."

That wasn't exactly the wording used by a ducal lord on Gram. It was
the formula employed by a planetary king, like Napolyon of Flamberge
or Rodolf of Excalibur. And, now that he thought of it, Angus had
consistently used the royal first-person plural. Maybe that fellow
who had shouted about Angus the First of Gram had only been doing
what he'd been paid to do. This was being telecast, and Omfray of
Glaspyth and Ridgerd of Didreksburg would both be listening; as of
now, they'd start hiring mercenaries. Maybe that would get rid of
Dunnan for him.

The Duke gave the two-hand sword back to his esquire. The young
knight who was carrying the green and tawny shawl handed it to him,
and Elaine dropped the black and yellow one from her shoulders,
the only time a respectable woman ever did that in public, and her
mother caught and folded it. He stepped forward and draped the Trask
colors over her shoulders, and then took her in his arms. The
cheering broke out again, and some of Sesar Karvall's guardsmen
began firing a pom-pom somewhere.

       *       *       *       *       *

It took a little longer than he had expected to finish with the
toasts and shake hands with those who crowded around. Finally, the
exit march started, down the long walkway to the landing stage,
and the Duke and his party moved away to the rear to prepare for
the wedding feast at which everybody but the bride and groom would
celebrate. One of the bridesmaids gave Elaine a huge sheaf of
flowers, which she was to toss back from the escalator; she held it
in the crook of one arm and clung to his with the other.

"Darling; we really made it!" she was whispering, as though it were
too wonderful to believe.

Well, wasn't it?

One of the news cars--orange and blue, that was Westlands Telecast
& Teleprint--had floated just ahead of them and was letting down
toward the landing stage. For a moment, he was angry; that went
beyond the outer-orbit limits of journalistic propriety, even for
Westlands T & T. Then he laughed; today he was too happy for anger
about anything. At the foot of the escalator, Elaine kicked off her
gilded slippers--there was another pair in the car; he'd seen to
that personally--and they stepped onto the escalator and turned
about. The bridesmaids rushed forward, and began struggling for the
slippers, to the damage and disarray of their gowns, and when they
were half way up, Elaine heaved the bouquet and it burst apart among
them like a bomb of colored fragrance, and the girls below snatched
at the flowers, shrieking deliriously. Elaine stood, blowing kisses
to everybody, and he was shaking his clasped hands over his head,
until they were at the top.

When they turned and stepped off, the orange and blue aircar had
let down directly in front of them, blocking their way. Now he was
really furious, and started forward with a curse. Then he saw who
was in the car.

Andray Dunnan, his thin face contorted and the narrow mustache
writhing on his upper lip; he had a slit beside the window open
and was tilting the barrel of a submachine gun up and out of it.

He shouted, and at the same time tripped Elaine and flung her down.
He was throwing himself forward to cover her when there was a
blasting multiple report. Something sledged him in the chest;
his right leg crumpled under him. He fell--

He fell and fell and fell, endlessly, through darkness, out of
consciousness.




V


He was crucified, and crowned with a crown of thorns. Who had they
done that to? Somebody long ago, on Terra. His arms were drawn out
stiffly, and hurt; his feet and legs hurt, too, and he couldn't move
them, and there was this prickling at his brow. And he was blind.

[Illustration]

No; his eyes were just closed. He opened them, and there was a white
wall in front of him, patterned with a blue snow-crystal design, and
he realized that it was a ceiling and that he was lying on his back.
He couldn't move his head, but by shifting his eyes he saw that he
was completely naked and surrounded by a tangle of tubes and wires,
which puzzled him briefly. Then he knew that he was not on a bed,
but on a robomedic, and the tubes would be for medication and
wound drainage and intravenous feeding, and the wires would be
to electrodes imbedded in his body for diagnosis, and the
crown-of-thorns thing would be more electrodes for an encephalograph.
He'd been on one of those robomedics before, when he had been gored
by a bisonoid on the cattle range.

[Illustration]

That was what it was; he was still under treatment. But that seemed
so long ago; so many things--he must have dreamed them--seemed to
have happened.

Then he remembered, and struggled futilely to rise.

"Elaine!" he called. "Elaine, where are you?"

There was a stir and somebody came into his limited view; his
cousin, Nikkolay Trask.

"Nikkolay; Andray Dunnan," he said. "What happened to Elaine?"

Nikkolay winced, as though something he had expected to hurt had
hurt worse than he had expected.

"Lucas." He swallowed. "Elaine ... Elaine is dead."

Elaine is dead. That didn't make sense.

"She was killed instantly, Lucas. Hit six times; I don't think
she even felt the first one. She didn't suffer at all."

Somebody moaned, and then he realized that it had been himself.

"You were hit twice," Nikkolay was telling him. "One in the leg;
smashed the femur. And one in the chest. That one missed your heart
by an inch."

"Pity it did." He was beginning to remember clearly, now. "I threw
her down, and tried to cover her. I must have thrown her straight
into the burst and only caught the last of it myself." There was
something else; oh, yes. "Dunnan. Did they get him?"

Nikkolay shook his head. "He got away. Stole the _Enterprise_ and
took her off-planet."

"I want to get him myself."

He started to rise again; Nikkolay nodded to someone out of sight.
A cool hand touched his chin, and he smelled a woman's perfume,
nothing at all like Elaine's. Something like a small insect bit
him on the neck. The room grew dark.

Elaine was dead. There was no more Elaine, nowhere at all. Why,
that must mean there was no more world. So that was why it had
gotten so dark.

He woke again, fitfully, and it would be daylight and he could see
the yellow sky through an open window or it would be night and the
wall-lights would be on. There would always be somebody with him.
Nikkolay's wife, Dame Cecelia; Rovard Grauffis; Lady Lavina
Karvall--he must have slept a long time, for she was so much older
than he remembered--and her brother, Burt Sandrasan. And a woman
with dark hair, in a white smock with a gold caduceus on her breast.

Once, Duchess Flavia, and once Duke Angus himself. He asked where
he was, not much caring. They told him, at the Ducal Palace.

He wished they'd all go away, and let him go wherever Elaine was.

Then it would be dark, and he would be trying to find her, because
there was something he wanted desperately to show her. Stars in the
sky at night, that was it. But there were no stars, there was no
Elaine, there was no anything, and he wished that there was no
Lucas Trask, either.

But there was an Andray Dunnan. He could see him standing
black-cloaked on the terrace, the diamonds in his beret-jewel
glittering evilly; he could see the mad face peering at him over
the rising barrel of the submachine gun. And then he would hunt
for him without finding him, through the cold darkness of space.

The waking periods grew longer, and during them his mind was clear.
They relieved him of his crown of electronic thorns. The feeding
tubes came out, and they gave him cups of broth and fruit juice.
He wanted to know why he had been brought to the Palace.

"About the only thing we could do," Rovard Grauffis told him.
"They had too much trouble at Karvall House as it was. You know,
Sesar got shot, too."

"No." So that was why Sesar hadn't come to see him. "Was he killed?"

"Wounded; he's in worse shape than you are. When the shooting
started, he went charging up the escalator. Didn't have anything
but his dress-dagger. Dunnan gave him a quick burst; I think that
was why he didn't have time to finish you off. By that time, the
guards who'd been shooting blanks from that rapid-fire gun got in
a clip of live rounds and fired at him. He got out of there as fast
as he could. They have Sesar on a robomedic like yours. He isn't
in any danger."

The drainage tubes and medication tubes came out; the tangle of
wires around him was removed, and the electrodes with them. They
bandaged his wounds and dressed him in a loose robe and lifted him
from the robomedic to a couch, where he could sit up when he wished;
they began giving him solid food, and wine to drink, and allowed him
to smoke. The woman doctor told him he'd had a bad time, as though
he didn't know that. He wondered if she expected him to thank her
for keeping him alive.

"You'll be up and around in a few weeks," his cousin added. "I've
seen to it that everything at Traskon New House will be ready for
you by then."

"I'll never enter that house as long as I live, and I wish that
wouldn't be more than the next minute. That was to be Elaine's
house. I won't go to it alone."

       *       *       *       *       *

The dreams troubled his sleep less and less as he grew stronger.
Visitors came often, bringing amusing little gifts, and he found
that he enjoyed their company. He wanted to know what had really
happened, and how Dunnan had gotten away.

"He pirated the _Enterprise_," Rovard Grauffis told him. "He had
that company of mercenaries of his, and he'd bribed some of the
people at the Gorram shipyards. I thought Alex would kill his chief
of security when he found out what had happened. We can't prove
anything--we're trying hard enough to--but we're sure Omfray of
Glaspyth furnished the money. He's been denying it just a shade
too emphatically."

"Then the whole thing was planned in advance."

"Taking the ship was; he must have been planning that for months;
before he started recruiting that company. I think he meant to do
it the night before the wedding. Then he tried to persuade the
Lady-Demoiselle Elaine to elope with him--he seems to have actually
thought that was possible--and when she humiliated him, he decided
to kill both of you first." He turned to Otto Harkaman, who had
accompanied him. "As long as I live, I'll regret not taking you
at your word and accepting your offer, then."

"How did he get hold of that Westlands Telecast and Teleprint car?"

"Oh. The morning of the wedding, he screened Westlands editorial
office and told them he had the inside story on the marriage and
why the Duke was sponsoring it. Made it sound as though there was
some scandal; insisted that a reporter come to Dunnan House for a
face-to-face interview. They sent a man, and that was the last they
saw him alive; our people found his body at Dunnan House when we
were searching the place afterward. We found the car at the
shipyard; it had taken a couple of hits from the guns at Karvall
House, but you know what these press cars are built to stand. He
went directly to the shipyard, where his men already had the
_Enterprise_; as soon as he arrived, she lifted out."

He stared at the cigarette between his fingers. It was almost
short enough to burn him. With an effort, he leaned forward to
crush it out.

"Rovard, how soon will that second ship be finished?"

Grauffis laughed bitterly. "Building the _Enterprise_ took
everything we had. The duchy's on the edge of bankruptcy now. We
stopped work on the second ship six months ago because we didn't
have enough money to keep on with her and still get the _Enterprise_
finished. We were expecting the _Enterprise_ to make enough in the
Old Federation to finish the second one. Then, with two ships and
a base on Tanith, the money would begin coming in instead of going
out. But now--"

"It leaves me where I was on Flamberge," Harkaman added. "Worse.
King Napolyon was going to help the Elmersans, and I'd have gotten
a command in that. It's too late for that now."

He picked up his cane and used it to push himself to his feet.
The broken leg had mended, but he was still weak. He took a few
tottering steps, paused to lean on the cane, and then forced
himself on to the open window and stood for a moment staring out.
Then he turned.

"Captain Harkaman, it might be that you could still get a command,
here on Gram. That's if you don't mind commanding under me as
owner-aboard. I am going hunting for Andray Dunnan."

They both looked at him. After a moment, Harkaman said:

"I'd count it an honor, Lord Trask. But where will you get a ship?"

"She's half finished now. You already have a crew for her. Duke
Angus can finish her for me, and pay for it by pledging his new
barony of Traskon."

He had known Rovard Grauffis all his life; until this moment,
he had never seen Duke Angus' henchman show surprise.

"You mean, you'll trade Traskon for that ship?" he demanded.

"Finished, equipped and ready for space, yes."

"The Duke will agree to that," Grauffis said promptly. "But, Lucas;
Traskon is all you own."

"If I have a ship, I won't need them. I am turning Space Viking."

That brought Harkaman to his feet with a roar of approval. Grauffis
looked at him, his mouth slightly open.

"Lucas Trask--Space Viking," he said. "Now I've heard everything."

Well, why not? He had deplored the effects of Viking raiding on
the Sword-Worlds, because Gram was a Sword-World, and Traskon was
on Gram, and Traskon was to have been the home where he and Elaine
would live and where their children and children's children would
be born and live. Now the little point on which all of it had
rested was gone.

"That was another Lucas Trask, Rovard. He's dead, now."




VI


Grauffis excused himself to make a screen call and then returned to
excuse himself again. Evidently Duke Angus had dropped whatever he
was doing as soon as he heard what his henchman had to tell him.
Harkaman was silent until after he was out of the room, then said:

"Lord Trask, this is a wonderful thing for me. It's not been
pleasant to be a shipless captain living on strangers' bounty.
I'd hate, though, to have you think, some time, that I'd advanced
my own fortunes at the expense of yours."

"Don't worry about that. If anybody's being taken advantage of,
you are. I need a space-captain, and your misfortune is my own
good luck."

Harkaman started to pack tobacco into his pipe. "Have you ever been
off Gram, at all?" he asked.

"A few years at the University of Camelot, on Excalibur. Otherwise, no."

"Well, have you any conception of the sort of thing you're setting
yourself to?" The Space Viking snapped his lighter and puffed.
"You know, of course, how big the Old Federation is. You know the
figures, that is, but do they mean anything to you? I know they
don't to a good many spacemen, even. We talk glibly about ten to the
hundredth power, but emotionally we still count, 'One, Two, Three,
Many.' A ship in hyperspace logs about a light-year an hour. You
can go from here to Excalibur in thirty hours. But you could send
a radio message announcing the birth of a son, and he'd be a father
before it was received. The Old Federation, where you're going to
hunt Dunnan, occupies a space-volume of two hundred billion cubic
light-years. And you're hunting for one ship and one man in that.
How are you going to do it, Lord Trask?"

"I haven't started thinking about how; all I know is that I have to
do it. There are planets in the Old Federation where Space Vikings
come and go; raid-and-trade bases, like the one Duke Angus planned
to establish on Tanith. At one or another of them, I'll pick up word
of Dunnan, sooner or later."

"We'll hear where he was a year ago, and by the time we get there,
he'll be gone for a year and a half to two years. We've been raiding
the Old Federation for over three hundred years, Lord Trask. At present,
I'd say there are at least two hundred Space Viking ships in operation.
Why haven't we raided it bare long ago? Well, that's the answer:
distance and voyage-time. You know, Dunnan could die of old age--which
is not a usual cause of death among Space Vikings--before you caught up
with him. And your youngest ship's-boy could die of old age before he
found out about it."

"Well, I can go on hunting for him till I die, then. There's nothing
else that means anything to me."

"I thought it was something like that. I won't be with you, all your
life. I want a ship of my own, like the _Corisande_, that I lost on
Durendal. Some day, I'll have one. But till you can command your own
ship, I'll command her for you. That's a promise."

Some note of ceremony seemed indicated. Summoning a robot, he had it
pour wine for them, and they pledged each other.

Rovard Grauffis had recovered his aplomb by the time he returned
accompanied by the Duke. If Angus had ever lost his, he gave no
indication of it. The effect on everybody else was literally seismic.
The generally accepted view was that Lord Trask's reason had been
unhinged by his tragic loss; there might, he conceded, be more than
a crumb of truth in that. At first, his cousin Nikkolay raged at him
for alienating the barony from the family, and then he learned that
Duke Angus was appointing him vicar-baron and giving him Traskon
New House for his residence. Immediately he began acting like one
at the death-bed of a rich grandmother. The Wardshaven financial
and industrial barons, whom he had known only distantly, on the
other hand, came flocking around him, offering assistance and
hailing him as the savior of the duchy. Duke Angus' credit, almost
obliterated by the loss of the _Enterprise_, was firmly
re-established, and theirs with it.

There were conferences at which lawyers and bankers argued
interminably; he attended a few at first, found himself completely
uninterested, and told everybody so. All he wanted was a ship; the
best ship possible, as soon as possible. Alex Gorram had been the
first to be notified; he had commenced work on the unfinished
sister-ship of the _Enterprise_ immediately. Until he was strong
enough to go to the shipyard himself, he watched the work on the
two-thousand-foot globular skeleton by screen, and conferred either
in person or by screen with engineers and shipyard executives. His
rooms at the ducal palace were converted, almost overnight, from
sickrooms to offices. The doctors, who had recently been urging
him to find new interests and activities, were now warning of the
dangers of overexertion. Harkaman finally added his voice to theirs.

"You take it easy, Lucas." They had dropped formality and were
on a first-name basis now. "You got hulled pretty badly; you let
damage-control work on you, and don't strain the machinery till
it's fixed. We have plenty of time. We're not going to get anywhere
chasing Dunnan. The only way we can catch him is by interception.
The longer he moves around in the Old Federation before he hears
we're after him, the more of a trail he'll leave. Once we can
establish a predictable pattern, we'll have a chance. Then, some
time, he'll come out of hyperspace somewhere and find us waiting
for him."

"Do you think he went to Tanith?"

Harkaman heaved himself out of his chair and prowled about the room
for a few minutes, then came back and sat down again.

"No. That was Duke Angus' idea, not his. He couldn't put in a base
on Tanith, anyhow. You know the kind of a crew he has."

There had been an extensive inquiry into Dunnan's associates and
accomplices; Duke Angus was still hoping for positive proof to
implicate Omfray of Glaspyth in the piracy. Dunnan had with him
a dozen and a half employees of the Gorram shipyards whom he had
corrupted. There was some technical ability among them, but for the
most part they were agitators and trouble-makers and incompetent
workmen. Even under the circumstances, Alex Gorram was glad to see
the last of them. As for Dunnan's own mercenary company, there were
about a score of former spacemen among them; the rest graded down
from bandits through thugs and sneak-thieves to barroom bums.
Dunnan himself was an astrogator, not an engineer.

"That gang aren't even good enough for routine raiding," Harkaman
said. "They'd never under any circumstances be able to put in a base
on Tanith. Unless Dunnan's completely crazy, which I doubt, he's gone
to some regular Viking base planet, like Hoth or Nergal or Dagon or
Xochitl, to recruit officers and engineers and able spacemen."

"All that machinery and robotic equipment and so on that was going
to Tanith--was that aboard when he took the ship?"

"Yes, and that's another reason why he'd go to some planet like Hoth
or Nergal or Xochitl. On a Viking-occupied planet in the Old
Federation, that stuff's almost worth its weight in gold."

"What's Tanith like?"

"Almost completely Terra-type, third of a Class-G sun. Very much
like Haulteclere or Flamberge. It was one of the last planets the
Federation colonized before the Big War. Nobody knows what happened,
exactly. There wasn't any interstellar war; at least, you don't find
any big slag-puddles where cities used to be. They probably did
a lot of fighting among themselves, after they got out of the
Federation. There's still some traces of combat-damage around. Then
they started to decivilize, down to the pre-mechanical level--wind
and water power and animal power. They have draft-animals that look
like introduced Terran carabaos, and a few small sailboats and big
canoes and bateaux on the rivers. They have gunpowder, which seems
to be the last thing any people lose.

"I was there, five years ago. I liked Tanith for a base. There's one
moon, almost solid nickel iron, and fissionable-ore deposits. Then,
like a fool, I hired out to the Elmersans on Durendal and lost my
ship. When I came here, your Duke was thinking about Xipototec. I
convinced him that Tanith was a better planet for his purpose."

"Dunnan might go there, at that. He might think he was scoring one
on Duke Angus. After all, he has all that equipment."

"And nobody to use it. If I were Dunnan, I'd go to Nergal, or
Xochitl. There are always a couple of thousand Space Vikings on
either, spending their loot and taking it easy between raids. He
could sign on a full crew on either. I suggest we go to Xochitl,
first. We might pick up news of him, if nothing else."

       *       *       *       *       *

All right, they'd try Xochitl first. Harkaman knew the planet,
and was friendly with the Haulteclere noble who ruled it.

The work went on at the Gorram shipyard; it had taken a year
to build the _Enterprise_, but the steel-mills and engine-works
were over the preparatory work of tooling up, and material and
equipment was flowing in a steady stream. Lucas let them persuade
him to take more rest, and day by day grew stronger. Soon he was
spending most of his time at the shipyard, watching the engines
go in--Abbot lift-and-drive for normal space, Dillingham hyperdrive,
power-converters, pseudograv, all at the center of the globular ship.

Living quarters and workshops went in next, all armored in
collapsium-plated steel. Then the ship lifted out to an orbit a
thousand miles off-planet, followed by swarms of armored work-craft
and cargo-lighters; the rest of the work was more easily done in
space. At the same time, the four two-hundred-foot pinnaces that
would be carried aboard were being finished. Each of them had its
own hyperdrive engines, and could travel as far and as fast as
the ship herself.

Otto Harkaman was beginning to be distressed because the ship still
lacked a name. He didn't like having to speak of her as "her," or
"the ship," and there were many things soon to go on that should be
name-marked. _Elaine_, Trask thought, at once, and almost at once
rejected it. He didn't want her name associated with the things
that ship would do in the Old Federation. _Revenge_, _Avenger_,
_Retribution_, _Vendetta_; none appealed to him. A news-commentator,
turgidly eloquent about the nemesis which the criminal Dunnan had
invoked against himself, supplied it, _Nemesis_ it was.

Now he was studying his new profession of interstellar robbery and
murder against which he had once inveighed. Otto Harkaman's handful
of followers became his teachers. Vann Larch, guns-and-missiles,
who was also a painter; Guatt Kirbey, sour and pessimistic, the
hyperspatial astrogator who tried to express his science in music;
Sharll Renner, the normal-space astrogator. Alvyn Karffard, the
exec, who had been with Harkaman longest of all. And Sir Paytrik
Morland, a local recruit, formerly guard-captain to Count Lionel
of Newhaven, who commanded the ground-fighters and the combat
contragravity. They were using the farms and villages of Traskon
for drill and practice, and he noticed that while the _Nemesis_
would carry only five hundred ground and air fighters, over a
thousand were being trained.

He commented to Rovard Grauffis.

"Yes. Don't mention it outside," the Duke's henchman said. "You and
Sir Paytrik and Captain Harkaman will pick the five hundred best.
The Duke will take the rest into his service. Some of these days,
Omfray of Glaspyth will find out what a Space Viking raid is really
like."

And Duke Angus would tax his new subjects of Glaspyth to redeem
the pledges on his new barony of Traskon. Some old Pre-Atomic writer
Harkaman was fond of quoting had said, "Gold will not always get
you good soldiers, but good soldiers can get you gold."

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Nemesis_ came back to the Gorram yards and settled onto her
curved landing legs like a monstrous spider. The _Enterprise_ had
borne the Ward sword and atom-symbol; the _Nemesis_ should bear his
own badge, but the bisonoid head, tawny on green, of Traskon, was no
longer his. He chose a skull impaled on an upright sword, and it was
blazoned on the ship when he and Harkaman took her out for her
shakedown cruise.

When they landed again at the Gorram yards, two hundred hours later,
they learned that a tramp freighter from Morglay had come into
Bigglersport in their absence with news of Andray Dunnan. Her
captain had come to Wardshaven at Duke Angus' urgent invitation
and was waiting for them at the Ducal Palace.

They sat, a dozen of them, around a table in the Duke's private
apartments. The freighter captain, a small, precise man with a
graying beard, alternately puffed at a cigarette and sipped from
a beaker of brandy.

"I spaced out from Morglay two hundred hours ago," he was saying. "I'd
been there twelve local days, three hundred Galactic Standard hours,
and the run from Curtana was three hundred and twenty. This ship,
the _Enterprise_, spaced out from there several days before I did.
I'd say she's twelve hundred hours out of Windsor, on Curtana, now."

The room was still. The breeze fluttered curtains at the open
windows; from the garden below, winged night-things twittered.

[Illustration]

"I never expected it," Harkaman said. "I thought he'd take the ship
out to the Old Federation at once." He poured wine for himself. "Of
course, Dunnan's crazy. A crazy man has an advantage, sometimes,
like a left-handed knife-fighter. He does unexpected things."

"That wasn't such a crazy move," Rovard Grauffis said. "We have very
little direct trade with Curtana. It's only an accident we heard
about this when we did."

The freighter captain's beaker was half empty. He filled it to the
brim from the decanter.

"She was the first Gram ship there for years," he agreed. "That
attracted notice, of course. And his having the blazonry changed,
from the sword and atom-symbol to the blue crescent. And the
ill-feeling on the part of other captains and planet-side employers
about the men he'd lured away from them."

"How many men and what kind?"

The man with the gray beard shrugged. "I was too busy getting a
cargo together for Morglay, to pay much attention. Almost a full
spaceship complement, officers and spacemen of every kind. And a
lot of industrial engineers and technicians."

"Then he is going to use that equipment that was aboard, and put in
a base somewhere," somebody said.

[Illustration]

"If he left Curtana twelve hundred hours ago, he's still in
hyperspace," Guatt Kirbey said. "It's over two thousand from Curtana
to the nearest Old Federation planet."

"How far to Tanith?" Duke Angus asked. "I'm sure that's where he's
gone. He'd expect me to finish the other ship and equip her like the
_Enterprise_ and send her out; he'd want to get there first."

"I'd thought that Tanith would be the last place he'd go," Harkaman
said, "but this changes the whole outlook. He could have gone to Tanith."

"He's crazy, and you're trying to apply sane logic to him," Guatt
Kirbey said. "You're figuring what you'd do, and you aren't crazy.
Of course, I've had my doubts, at times, but--"

"Yes, he's crazy, and Captain Harkaman's allowing for that," Rovard
Grauffis said. "Dunnan hates all of us. He hates his Grace, here.
He hates Lord Lucas, and Sesar Karvall; of course, he may think
he killed both of them. He hates Captain Harkaman. So how could
he score all of us off at once? By taking Tanith."

"You say he was buying supplies and ammunition?"

"That's right. Gun ammunition, ship's missiles, and a lot of
ground-defense missiles."

"What was he buying them with? Trading machinery?"

"No. Gold."

"Yes. Lothar Ffayle found out that a lot of gold was transferred to
Dunnan from banks in Glaspyth and Didreksburg," Grauffis said. "He
got that aboard when he took the ship, evidently."

"All right," Trask said. "We can't be sure of anything, but we have
some reasons for thinking he went to Tanith, and that's more than
we have for any other planet in the Old Federation. I won't try to
estimate the odds against our finding him there, but they're a good
deal bigger anywhere else. We'll go there, first."




VII


The outside viewscreen, which had been vacantly gray for over
three thousand hours, was now a vertiginous swirl of color, the
indescribable color of a collapsing hyperspatial field. No two
observers ever saw it alike, and no imagination could vision the
actuality. Trask found that he was holding his breath. So, he
noticed, was Otto Harkaman, beside him. It was something, evidently,
that nobody got used to. Even Guatt Kirbey, the astrogator, was
sitting with his pipe clenched in his mouth, staring at the screen.

Then, in an instant, the stars, which had literally not been there
before, filled the screen with a blaze of splendor against the black
velvet backdrop of normal space. Dead in the center, brighter than
all the rest, Ertado's Star, the sun of Tanith, burned yellowly.
The light from it was ten hours old.

"Pretty good, Guatt," Harkaman said, picking up his cup.

"Good, Gehenna; it was perfect," somebody else said.

Kirbey was relighting his pipe. "Oh, I suppose it'll have to do," he
grudged, around the stem. He had gray hair and an untidy mustache,
and nothing was ever quite good enough to satisfy him. "I could have
made it a little closer. Need three microjumps, now, and I'll have
to cut the last one pretty fine. Now don't bother me." He began
punching buttons for data and fiddling with setscrews and verniers.

For a moment, in the screen, Trask could see the face of Andray
Dunnan. He blinked it away and reached for his cigarettes, and put
one in his mouth wrong-end-to. When he reversed it and snapped his
lighter, he saw that his hand was trembling. Otto Harkaman must have
seen that, too.

"Take it easy, Lucas," he whispered. "Keep your optimism under
control. We only think he might be here."

"I'm sure he is. He has to be."

No; that was the way Dunnan, himself, thought. Let's be sane about this.

"We have to assume he is. If we do, and he isn't it's a
disappointment. If we don't, and he is, it's a disaster."

Others, it seemed, thought the same way. The battle-stations board
was a solid blaze of red light for full combat readiness.

"All right," Kirbey said. "Jumping."

Then he twisted the red handle to the right and shoved it in
viciously. Again the screen boiled with colored turbulence; again
dark and mighty forces stalked through the ship like demons in a
sorcerer's tower. The screen turned featureless gray as the pickups
stared blindly into some dimensionless noplace. Then it convulsed
with color again, and this time Ertado's Star, still in the center,
was a coin-sized disk, with the little sparks of its seven planets
scattered around it. Tanith was the third--the inhabitable planet of
a G-class system usually was. It had a single moon, barely visible
in the telescopic screen, five hundred miles in diameter and fifty
thousand off-planet.

"You know," Kirbey said, as though he was afraid to admit it, "that
wasn't too bad. I think we can make it in one more microjump."

Some time, Trask supposed, he'd be able to use the expression
"micro-" about a distance of fifty-five million miles, too.

"What do you think about it?" Harkaman asked him, as deferentially
as though seeking expert guidance instead of examining his
apprentice. "Where should Guatt put us?"

"As close as possible, of course." That would be a light-second at
the least; if the _Nemesis_ came out of hyperspace any closer to
anything the size of Tanith, the collapsing field itself would
kick her back. "We have to assume Dunnan's been there at least
nine hundred hours. By that time, he could have put in a
detection-station, and maybe missile-launchers, on the moon. The
_Enterprise_ carries four pinnaces, the same as the _Nemesis_; in
his place, I'd have at least two of them on off-planet patrol. So
let's accept it that we'll be detected as soon as we come out of
the last jump, and come out with the moon directly between us and
the planet. If it's occupied, we can knock it off on the way in."

"A lot of captains would try to come out with the moon masked off
by the planet," Harkaman said.

"Would you?"

The big man shook his tousled head. "No. If they have launchers on
the moon, they could launch at us in a curve around the planet, by
data relayed from the other side, and we'd be at a disadvantage
replying. Just go straight in. You hearing this, Guatt?"

"Yeah. It makes sense. Sort of. Now, stop pestering me. Sharll,
look here a minute."

The normal-space astrogator conferred with him; Alvyn Karffard, the
executive officer, joined them. Finally Kirbey pulled out the big
red handle, twisted it, and said, "All right, jumping." He shoved
it in. "I suppose I cut it too fine; now we'll get kicked back half
a million miles."

The screen convulsed again; when it cleared the third planet was
directly in the center; its small moon, looking almost as large, was
a little above and to the right, sunlit on one side and planetlit on
the other. Kirbey locked the red handle, gathered up his tobacco and
lighter and things from the ledge, and pulled down the cover of the
instrument-console, locking it.

"All yours, Sharll," he told Renner.

"Eight hours to atmosphere," Renner said. "That's if we don't have
to waste a lot of time shooting up Junior, there."

Vann Larch was looking at the moon in the six hundred power screen.

"I don't see anything to shoot. Five hundred miles; one
planetbuster, or four or five thermonuclears," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

It wasn't right, Trask thought indignantly. Minutes ago, Tanith had
been six and a half billion miles away. Seconds ago, fifty-odd million.
And now, a quarter of a million, and looking close enough to touch
in the screen, it would take them eight hours to reach it. Why, on
hyperdrive you could go forty-eight trillion miles in that time.

Well, it took a man just as long to walk across a room today as it
had taken Pharaoh the First, or Homo Sap.

In the telescopic screen Tanith looked like any picture of any
Terra-type planet from space, with cloud-blurred contours of seas
and continents and a vague mottling of gray and brown and green,
topped at the pole by an icecap. None of the surface features, not
even the major mountain ranges or rivers, were yet distinguishable,
but Harkaman and Sharll Renner and Alvyn Karffard and the other old
hands seemed to recognize it. Karffard was talking by phone to Paul
Koreff, the signals-and-detection officer, who could detect nothing
from the moon and nothing that was getting through the Van Allen
belt from the planet.

Maybe they'd guessed wrong, at that. Maybe Dunnan hadn't gone to
Tanith at all.

Harkaman, who had the knack of putting himself to sleep at will,
with some sixth or _n_-th sense posted as a sentry, leaned back in
his chair and closed his eyes. Trask wished he could, too. It would
be hours before anything happened, and until then he needed all the
rest he could get. He drank more coffee, chain-smoked cigarettes;
he rose and prowled about the command room, looking at screens.
Signals-and-detection was getting a lot of routine stuff--Van Allen
count, micrometeor count, surface temperature, gravitation-field
strength, radar and scanner echoes. He went back to his chair and
sat down, staring at the screen-image. The planet didn't seem to be
getting any closer at all, and it ought to; they were approaching
it at better than escape velocity. He sat and stared at it.

He woke with a start. The screen-image was much larger, now. River
courses and the shadow lines of mountains were clearly visible. It
must be early autumn in the northern hemisphere; there was snow down
to the sixtieth parallel and a belt of brown was pushing south
against the green. Harkaman was sitting up, eating lunch. By the
clock, it was four hours later.

"Have a good nap?" he asked. "We're picking up some stuff, now.
Radio and screen signals. Not much, but some. The locals wouldn't
have learned enough for that in the five years since I was here.
We didn't stay long enough, for one thing."

On decivilized planets that were visited by Space Vikings, the
locals picked up bits and scraps of technology very quickly. In the
four months of idleness and long conversations while they were in
hyperspace he had heard many stories confirming that. But from the
level to which Tanith had sunk, radio and screen communication in
five years was a little too much of a jump.

"You didn't lose any men, did you?"

That happened frequently--men who took up with local women, men who
had made themselves unpopular with their shipmates, men who just
liked the planet and wanted to stay. They were always welcomed by
the locals for what they could do and teach.

"No, we weren't there long enough for that. Only three hundred and
fifty hours. This we're getting is outside stuff; somebody's there
beside the locals."

Dunnan. He looked again at the battle-stations board; it was still
uniformly red-lighted. Everything was on full combat ready. He
summoned a mess-robot, selected a couple of dishes, and began
to eat. After the first mouthful, he called to Alvyn Karffard:

"Is Paul getting anything new?" he asked.

Karffard checked. A little contragravity-field distortion effect.
It was still too far to be sure. He went back to his lunch. He had
finished it and was lighting a cigarette over his coffee when a red
light flashed and a voice from one of the speakers shouted.

"Detection! Detection from planet! Radar, and microray!"

Karffard began talking rapidly into a hand-phone; Harkaman unhooked
one beside him and listened.

"Coming from a definite point, about twenty-fifth north parallel,"
he said, aside. "Could be from a ship hiding against the planet.
There's nothing at all on the moon."

       *       *       *       *       *

They seemed to be approaching the planet more and more rapidly.
Actually, they weren't, the ship was decelerating to get into
an orbit, but the decreasing distance created the illusion of
increasing speed. The red lights flashed once more.

"_Ship detected!_ Just outside atmosphere, coming around the planet
from the west."

"Is she the _Enterprise_?"

"Can't tell, yet," Karffard said, and then cried: "There she is,
in the screen! That spark, about thirty degrees north, just off
the west side."

Aboard her, too, voices from speakers would be shouting, "Ship
detected!" and the battle station board would be blazing red.
And Andray Dunnan, at the command-desk--

"She's calling us." That was Paul Koreff's voice, out of the
squawk-box on the desk. "Standard Sword-World impulse-code.
Interrogative: What ship are you? Informative: her screen
combination. Request: Please communicate."

"All right," Harkaman said. "Let's be polite and communicate.
What's her screen-combination?"

Koreff's voice gave it, and Harkaman punched it out. The
communication screen in front of them lit at once; Trask shoved over
his chair beside Harkaman's, his hands tightening on the arms. Would
it be Dunnan himself, and what would his face show when he saw who
confronted him out of his own screen?

It took him an instant to realize that the other ship was not the
_Enterprise_ at all. The _Enterprise_ was the _Nemesis'_ twin; her
command room was identical with his own. This one was different in
arrangements and fittings. The _Enterprise_ was a new ship; this one
was old, and had suffered for years at the hands of a slack captain
and a slovenly crew.

And the man who sat facing him in the screen was not Andray Dunnan,
or any man he had ever seen before. A dark-faced man, with an old
scar that ran down one cheek from a little below the eye; he had
curly black hair, on his head and on a V of chest exposed by an open
shirt. There was an ashtray in front of him, and a thin curl of
smoke rose from a cigar in it, and coffee steamed in an ornate but
battered silver cup beside it. He was grinning gleefully.

"Well! Captain Harkaman, of the _Enterprise_, I believe! Welcome
to Tanith. Who's the gentleman with you? He isn't the Duke of
Wardshaven, is he?"




VIII


He glanced quickly at the showback over the screen, to assure
himself that his face was not betraying him. Beside him, Otto
Harkaman was laughing.

"Why, Captain Valkanhayn; this is an unexpected pleasure. That's
the _Space Scourge_ you're in, I take it? What are you doing here
on Tanith?"

A voice from one of the speakers shouted that a second ship had
been detected coming over the north pole. The dark-faced man in
the screen smirked quite complacently.

"That's Garvan Spasso, in the _Lamia_," he said. "And what we're
doing here, we've taken this planet over. We intend keeping it, too."

"Well! So you and Garvan have teamed up. You two were just made for
one another. And you have a little planet, all your very own. I'm so
happy for both of you. What are you getting out of it--beside poultry?"

The other's self-assurance started to slip. He slapped it back into place.

"Don't kid me; we know why you're here. Well, we got here first.
Tanith is our planet. You think you can take it away from us?"

"I know we could, and so do you," Harkaman told him. "We outgun you
and Spasso together; why, a couple of our pinnaces could knock the
_Lamia_ apart. The only question is, do we want to bother?"

By now, he had recovered from his surprise, but not from his
disappointment. If this fellow thought the _Nemesis_ was the
_Enterprise_--Before he could check himself, he had finished
the thought aloud.

"Then the _Enterprise_ didn't come here at all!"

The man in the screen started. "Isn't that the _Enterprise_ you're in?"

"Oh, no. Pardon my remissness, Captain Valkanhayn," Harkaman
apologized. "This is the _Nemesis_. The gentleman with me, Lord
Lucas Trask, is owner-aboard, for whom I am commanding. Lord Trask,
Captain Boake Valkanhayn, of the _Space Scourge_. Captain Valkanhayn
is a Space Viking." He said that as though expecting it to be
disputed. "So, I am told, is his associate, Captain Spasso, whose
ship is approaching. You mean to tell me that the _Enterprise_
hasn't been here?"

Valkanhayn was puzzled, slightly apprehensive.

"You mean the Duke of Wardshaven has two ships?"

"As far as I know, the Duke of Wardshaven hasn't any ships,"
Harkaman replied. "This ship is the property and private adventure
of Lord Trask. The _Enterprise_, for which we are looking, is owned
and commanded by one Andray Dunnan."

The man with the scarred face and hairy chest had picked up his cigar
and was puffing on it mechanically. Now he took it out of his mouth
as though he wondered how it had gotten there in the first place.

"But isn't the Duke of Wardshaven sending a ship here to establish
a base? That was what we'd heard. We heard you'd gone from Flamberge
to Gram to command for him."

"Where did you hear this? And when?"

"On Hoth. That'd be about two thousand hours ago; a Gilgamesher
brought the news from Xochitl."

"Well, considering it was fifth or sixth hand, your information was
good enough, when it was fresh. It was a year and a half old when
you got it, though. How long have you been here on Tanith?"

"About a thousand hours." Harkaman clucked sadly at that.

"Pity you wasted all that time. Well, it was nice talking to you,
Boake. Say hello to Garvan for me when he comes up."

"You mean you're not staying?" Valkanhayn was horrified, an odd
reaction for a man who had just been expecting a bitter battle
to drive them away. "You're just spacing right out again?"

Harkaman shrugged. "Do we want to waste time here, Lord Trask? The
_Enterprise_ has obviously gone somewhere else. She was still in
hyperspace when Captain Valkanhayn and his accomplice arrived here."

"Is there anything worth staying for?" That seemed to be the reply
Harkaman was expecting. "Beside poultry, that is?"

Harkaman shook his head. "This is Captain Valkanhayn's planet; his
and Captain Spasso's. Let them be stuck with it."

"But, look; this is a good planet. There's a big local city, maybe
ten or twenty thousand people; temples and palaces and everything.
Then, there are a couple of old Federation cities. The one we're at
is in good shape, and there's a big spaceport. We've been doing
a lot of work on it. And the locals won't give you any trouble.
All they have is spears and a few crossbows and matchlocks--"

"I know. I've been here."

"Well, couldn't we make some kind of a deal?" Valkanhayn asked.
A mendicant whine was beginning to creep into his voice. "I can
get Garvan on screen and switch him over to your ship--"

"Well, we have a lot of Sword-World merchandise aboard," Harkaman
said. "We could make you good prices on some of it. How are you
fixed for robotic equipment?"

"But aren't you going to stay here?" Valkanhayn was almost in a
panic. "Listen, suppose I talk to Garvan, and we all get together
on this. Just excuse me for a minute--"

As soon as he had blanked out, Harkaman threw back his head and
guffawed as though he had just heard the funniest and bawdiest joke
in the galaxy. Trask, himself, didn't feel like laughing.

"The humor escapes me," he admitted. "We came here on a fools' errand."

"I'm sorry, Lucas." Harkaman was still shaking with mirth. "I know
it's a letdown, but that pair of chiseling chicken thieves! I could
almost pity them, if it weren't so funny." He laughed again. "You
know what their idea was?"

Trask shook his head. "Who are they?"

"What I called them, a couple of chicken thieves. They raid planets
like Set and Hertha and Melkarth, where the locals haven't anything
to fight with--or anything worth fighting for. I didn't know they'd
teamed up, but that figures. Nobody else would team up with either
of them. What must have happened, this story of Duke Angus' Tanith
adventure must have filtered out to them, and they thought that if
they got here first, I'd think it was cheaper to take them in than
run them out. I probably would have, too. They do have ships, of a
sort, and they do raid, after a fashion. But now, there isn't going
to be any Tanith base, and they have a no-good planet and they're
stuck with it."

"Can't they make anything out of it themselves?"

"Like what?" Harkaman hooted. "They have no equipment, and they have
no men. Not for a job like that. The only thing they can do is space
out and forget it."

"We could sell them equipment."

"We could if they had anything to use for money. They haven't. One
thing, we do want to let down and give the men a chance to walk on
ground and look at a sky for a while. The girls here aren't too bad,
either," Harkaman said. "As I remember, some of them even take a
bath, now and then."

"That's the kind of news of Dunnan we're going to get. By the time
we'd get to where he's been reported, he'd be a couple of thousand
light-years away," he said disgustedly. "I agree; we ought to give
the men a chance to get off the ship, here. We can stall this pair
along for a while and we won't have any trouble with them."

       *       *       *       *       *

The three ships were slowly converging toward a point fifteen
thousand miles off-planet and over the sunset line. The _Space
Scourge_ bore the device of a mailed fist clutching a comet by the
head; it looked more like a whisk broom than a scourge. The _Lamia_
bore a coiled snake with the head, arms and bust of a woman.
Valkanhayn and Spasso were taking their time about screening back,
and he began to wonder if they weren't maneuvering the _Nemesis_
into a cross-fire position. He mentioned this to Harkaman and Alvyn
Karffard; they both laughed.

[Illustration]

"Just holding ship's meetings," Karffard said. "They'll be yakking
back and forth for a couple of hours, yet."

"Yes; Valkanhayn and Spasso don't own their ships," Harkaman
explained. "They've gone in debt to their crews for supplies and
maintenance till everybody owns everything in common. The ships
look like it, too. They don't even command, really; they just
preside over elected command-councils."

Finally, they had both of the more or less commanders on screen.
Valkanhayn had zipped up his shirt and put on a jacket. Garvan
Spasso was a small man, partly bald. His eyes were a shade too close
together, and his thin mouth had a bitterly crafty twist. He began
speaking at once:

"Captain, Boake tells me you say you're not here in the service of
the Duke of Wardshaven at all." He said it aggrievedly.

"That's correct," Harkaman said. "We came here because Lord Trask
thought another Gram ship, the _Enterprise_, would be here. Since
she isn't, there's no point in our being here. We do hope, though,
that you won't make any difficulty about our letting down and giving
our men a couple of hundred hours' liberty. They've been in
hyperspace for three thousand hours."

"See!" Spasso clamored. "He wants to trick us into letting him land--"

[Illustration]

"Captain Spasso," Trask cut in. "Will you please stop insulting
everybody's intelligence, your own included." Spasso glared at him,
belligerently but hopefully. "I understand what you thought you were
going to do here. You expected Captain Harkaman here to establish a
base for the Duke of Wardshaven, and you thought, if you were here
ahead of him and in a posture of defense, that he'd take you into
the Duke's service rather than waste ammunition and risk damage and
casualties wiping you out. Well, I'm very sorry, gentlemen. Captain
Harkaman is in my service, and I'm not in the least interested in
establishing a base on Tanith."

Valkanhayn and Spasso looked at each other. At least, in the two
side-by-side screens, their eyes shifted, each to the other's screen
on his own ship.

"I get it!" Spasso cried suddenly. "There's two ships, the
_Enterprise_ and this one. The Duke of Wardshaven fitted out the
_Enterprise_, and somebody else fitted out this one. They both want
to put in a base here!"

That opened a glorious vista. Instead of merely capitalizing on
their nuisance-value, they might find themselves holding the balance
of power in a struggle for the planet. All sorts of profitable
perfidies were possible.

"Why, sure you can land, Otto," Valkanhayn said. "I know what it's
like to be three thousand hours in hyper, myself."

"You're at this old city with the two tall tower-buildings, aren't
you?" Harkaman asked. He looked up at the viewscreen. "Ought to be
about midnight there now. How's the spaceport? When I was here, it
was pretty bad."

"Oh, we've been fixing it up. We got a big gang of locals working for us--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The city was familiar, from Otto Harkaman's descriptions and from
the pictures Vann Larch had painted during the long jump from Gram.
As they came in, it looked impressive, spreading for miles around
the twin buildings that spired almost three thousand feet above it,
with a great spaceport like an eight-pointed star at one side.
Whoever had built it, in the sunset splendor of the old Terran
Federation, must have done so confident that it would become the
metropolis of a populous and prospering world. Then the sun of the
Federation had gone down. Nobody knew what had happened on Tanith
after that, but evidently none of it had been good.

At first, the two towers seemed as sound as when they had been
built; gradually it became apparent that one was broken at the top.
For the most part, the smaller buildings scattered widely around
them were standing, though here and there mounds of brush-grown
rubble showed where some had fallen in. The spaceport looked good--a
central octagon mass of buildings, the landing-berths, and, beyond,
the triangular areas of airship docks and warehouses. The central
building was outwardly intact, and the ship-berths seemed clear of
wreckage and rubble.

By the time the _Nemesis_ was following the _Space Scourge_ and the
_Lamia_ down, towed by her own pinnaces, the illusion that they were
approaching a living city had vanished. The interspaces between the
buildings were choked with forest-growth, broken by a few small
fields and garden-plots. At one time, there had been three of the
high buildings, literally vertical cities in themselves. Where the
third had stood was a glazed crater, with a ridge of fallen rubble
lying away from it. Somebody must have landed a medium missile,
about twenty kilotons, against its base. Something of the same sort
had scored on the far edge of the spaceport, and one of the eight
arrowheads of docks and warehouses was an indistinguishable slag-pile.

The rest of the city seemed to have died of neglect rather than
violence. It certainly hadn't been bombed out. Harkaman thought most
of the fighting had been done with subneutron bombs or Omega-ray
bombs, that killed the people without damaging the real estate. Or
bio-weapons; a man-made plague that had gotten out of control and
all but depopulated the planet.

"It takes an awful lot of people, working together at an awful lot
of jobs, to keep a civilization running. Smash the installations and
kill the top technicians and scientists, and the masses don't know
how to rebuild and go back to stone hatchets. Kill off enough of the
masses and even if the planet and the know-how is left, there's
nobody to do the work. I've seen planets that decivilized both ways.
Tanith, I think, is one of the latter."

That had been during one of the long after-dinner bull sessions on the
way out from Gram. Somebody, one of the noble gentlemen-adventurers who
had joined the company after the piracy of the _Enterprise_ and the
murder, had asked:

"But some of them survived. Don't they know what happened?"

"_'In the old times, there were sorcerers. They built the old
buildings by wizard arts. Then the sorcerers fought among themselves
and went away,'_" Harkaman said. "That's all they know about it."

You could make any kind of an explanation out of that.

As the pinnaces pulled and nudged the _Nemesis_ down to her berth,
he could see people, far down on the spaceport floor, at work.
Either Valkanhayn and Spasso had more men than the size of their
ships indicated, or they had gotten a lot of locals to work for
them. More than the population of the moribund city, at least as
Harkaman remembered it.

There had been about five hundred in all; they lived by mining the
old buildings for metal, and trading metalwork for food and textiles
and powder and other things made elsewhere. It was accessible only
by oxcarts traveling a hundred miles across the plains; it had been
built by a contragravity-using people with utter disregard for
natural travel and transportation routes.

"I don't envy the poor buggers," Harkaman said, looking down at the
antlike figures on the spaceport floor. "Boake Valkanhayn and Garvan
Spasso have probably made slaves of the lot of them. If I was really
going to put in a base here, I wouldn't thank that pair for the
kind of public-relations work they've been doing among the locals."




IX


That was just about the situation. Spasso and Valkanhayn and some of
their officers met them on the landing stage of the big building in
the middle of the spaceport, where they had established quarters.
Entering and going down a long hallway, they passed a dozen men and
women gathering up rubbish from the floor with shovels and with
their hands and putting it into a lifter-skid. Both sexes wore
shapeless garments of coarse cloth, like ponchos, and flat-soled
sandals. Watching them was another local in a kilt, buskins and a
leather jerkin; he wore a short sword on his belt and carried a
wickedly thonged whip. He also wore a Space Viking combat helmet,
painted with the device of Spasso's _Lamia_. He bowed as they
approached, putting a hand to his forehead. After they had passed,
they could hear him shouting at the others, and the sound of whip-blows.

You make slaves out of people, and some will always be slave-drivers;
they will bow to you, and then take it out on the others. Harkaman's
nose was twitching as though he had a bit of rotten fish caught in
his mustache.

"We have about eight hundred of them. There were only three hundred
that were any good for work here; we gathered the rest up at villages
along the big river," Spasso was saying.

"How do you get food for them?" Harkaman asked. "Or don't you bother?"

"Oh, we gather that up all over," Valkanhayn told him. "We send
parties out with landing craft. They'll let down on a village, run
the locals out, gather up what's around and bring it here. Once in
a while they put up a fight, but the best they have is a few crossbows
and some muzzle-loading muskets. When they do, we burn the village
and machine-gun everybody we see."

"That's the stuff," Harkaman approved. "If the cow doesn't want to
be milked, just shoot her. Of course, you don't get much milk out of
her again, but--"

The room to which their hosts guided them was at the far end of the
hall. It had probably been a conference room or something of the
sort, and originally it had been paneled, but the paneling had long
ago vanished. Holes had been dug here and there in the walls, and he
remembered having noticed that the door was gone and the metal
groove in which it had slid had been pried out.

There was a big table in the middle, and chairs and couches covered
with colored spreads. All the furniture was handmade, cunningly
pegged together and highly polished. On the walls hung trophies of
weapons--thrusting-spears and throwing-spears, crossbows and quarrels,
and a number of heavy guns, crude things, but carefully made.

"Pick all this stuff up off the locals?" Harkaman asked.

"Yes, we got most of it at a big town down at the forks of the
river," Valkanhayn said. "We shook it down a couple of times. That's
where we recruited the fellows we're using to boss the workers."

Then he picked up a stick with a leather-covered knob and beat on a
gong, bawling for wine. A voice, somewhere, replied, "Yes, master; I
come!" and in a few moments a woman entered carrying a jug in either
hand. She was wearing a blue bathrobe several sizes too large for
her, instead of the poncho things the slaves in the hallway wore.
She had dark brown hair and gray eyes; if she had not been so
obviously frightened she would have been beautiful. She set the jugs
on the table and brought silver cups from a chest against the wall:
when Spasso dismissed her, she went out hastily.

"I suppose it's silly to ask if you're paying these people anything
for the work they do or for the things you take from them," Harkaman
said. From the way the _Space Scourge_ and _Lamia_ people laughed,
it evidently was. Harkaman shrugged. "Well, it's your planet. Make
any kind of a mess out of it you want to."

"You think we _ought_ to pay them?" Spasso was incredulous. "Damn
bunch of savages!"

"They aren't as savage as the Xochitl locals were when Haulteclere
took it over. You've been there; you've seen what Prince Viktor does
with them now."

"We haven't got the men or equipment they have on Xochitl,"
Valkanhayn said. "We can't afford to coddle the locals."

"You can't afford not to," Harkaman told him. "You have two ships,
here. You can only use one for raiding; the other will have to stay
here to hold the planet. If you take them both away, the locals,
whom you have been studiously antagonizing, will swamp whoever you
leave behind. And if you don't leave anybody behind, what's the use
of having a planetary base?"

"Well, why don't you join us," Spasso finally came out with it.
"With our three ships we could have a real thing, here."

Harkaman looked at him inquiringly. "The gentlemen," Trask said,
"are putting this wrongly. They mean, why don't we let them join
us?"

"Well, if you want to put it like that," Valkanhayn conceded. "We'll
admit, your _Nemesis_ would be the big end of it. But why not? Three
ships, we could have a real base here. Nikky Gratham's father only
had two when he started on Jagannath, and look what the Grathams got
there now."

"Are we interested?" Harkaman asked.

"Not very, I'm afraid. Of course, we've just landed; Tanith may
have great possibilities. Suppose we reserve decision for a while
and look around a little."

       *       *       *       *       *

There were stars in the sky, and, for good measure, a sliver of moon
on the western horizon. It was only a small moon, but it was close.
He walked to the edge of the landing stage, and Elaine was walking
with him. The noise from inside, where the _Nemesis_ crew were
feasting with those of the _Lamia_ and _Space Scourge_, grew fainter.
To the south, a star moved; one of the pinnaces they had left on
off-planet watch. There was firelight far below, and he could hear
singing. Suddenly he realized that it was the poor devils of locals
whom Valkanhayn and Spasso had enslaved. Elaine went away quickly.

"Have your fill of Space Viking glamour, Lucas?"

He turned. It was Baron Rathmore, who had come along to serve for a
year or so and then hitch a ride home from some base planet and cash
in politically on having been with Lucas Trask.

"For the moment. I'm told that this lot aren't typical."

"I hope not. They're a pack of sadistic brutes, and piggish along
with it."

"Well, brutality and bad manners I can condone, but Spasso and
Valkanhayn are a pair of ignominious little crooks, and stupid along
with it. If Andray Dunnan had gotten here ahead of us, he might have
done one good thing in his wretched life. I can't understand why he
didn't come here."

"I think he still will," Rathmore said. "I knew him and I knew
Nevil Ormm. Ormm's ambitious, and Dunnan is insanely vindictive--"
He broke off with a sour laugh. "I'm telling _you_ that!"

"Why didn't he come here directly, then?"

"Maybe he doesn't want a base on Tanith. That would be something
constructive; Dunnan's a destroyer. I think he took that cargo of
equipment somewhere and sold it. I think he'll wait till he's fairly
sure the other ship is finished. Then he'll come in and shoot the
place up, the way--" He bit that off abruptly.

"The way he did my wedding; I think of it all the time."

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning, he and Harkaman took an aircar and went to look
at the city at the forks of the river. It was completely new, in
the sense that it had been built since the collapse of Federation
civilization and the loss of civilized technologies. It was huddled
on a long, irregularly triangular mound, evidently to raise it above
flood-level. Generations of labor must have gone into it. To the
eyes of a civilization using contragravity and powered equipment it
wasn't at all impressive. Fifty to a hundred men with adequate
equipment could have gotten the thing up in a summer. It was only
by forcing himself to think in terms of spadeful after spadeful of
earth, cartload after cartload creaking behind straining beasts,
timber after timber cut with axes and dressed with adzes, stone
after stone and brick after brick, that he could appreciate it. They
even had it walled, with a palisade of tree-trunks behind which
earth and rocks had been banked, and along the river were docks,
at which boats were moored. The locals simply called it Tradetown.

As they approached, a big gong began booming, and a white puff of
smoke was followed by the thud of a signal-gun. The boats, long
canoe-like craft and round-bowed, many-oared barges, put out hastily
into the river; through binoculars they could see people scattering
from the surrounding fields, driving cattle ahead of them. By the
time they were over the city, nobody was in sight. They seemed
to have developed a pretty fair air-raid warning system in the
nine-hundred-odd hours in which they had been exposed to the
figurative mercies of Boake Valkanhayn and Garvan Spasso. It hadn't
saved them entirely; a section of the city had been burned, and
there were evidences of shelling. Light chemical-explosive stuff;
this city was too good a cow for even those two to kill before the
milking was over.

They circled slowly over it at a thousand feet. When they turned
away, black smoke began rising from what might have been pottery
works or brick-kilns on the outskirts; something resinous had
evidently been fed to the fires. Other columns of black smoke began
rising across the countryside on both sides of the river.

"You know, these people are civilized, if you don't limit the term
to contragravity and nuclear energy," Harkaman said. "They have
gunpowder, for one thing, and I can think of some rather impressive
Old Terran civilizations that didn't have that much. They have an
organized society, and anybody who has that is starting toward
civilization."

"I hate to think of what'll happen to this planet if Spasso and
Valkanhayn stay here long."

"Might be a good thing, in the long run. Good things in the long run
are often tough while they're happening. I know what'll happen to
Spasso and Valkanhayn, though. They'll start decivilizing, themselves.
They'll stay here for a while, and when they need something they
can't take from the locals they'll go chicken-stealing after it,
but most of the time they'll stay here lording it over their slaves,
and finally their ships will wear out and they won't be able to fix
them. Then, some time, the locals'll jump them when they aren't
watching and wipe them out. But in the meantime, the locals'll
learn a lot from them."

They turned the aircar west again along the river. They looked at a
few villages. One or two dated from the Federation period; they had
been plantations before whatever it was had happened. More had been
built within the past five centuries. A couple had recently been
destroyed, in punishment for the crime of self-defense.

"You know," he said, at length, "I'm going to do everybody a favor.
I'm going to let Spasso and Valkanhayn persuade me to take this
planet away from them."

Harkaman, who was piloting, turned sharply. "You crazy or something?"

"'When somebody makes a statement you don't understand, don't tell
him he's crazy. Ask him what he means.' Who said that?"

"On target," Harkaman grinned. "'What _do_ you mean, Lord Trask?'"

"I can't catch Dunnan by pursuit; I'll have to get him by
interception. You know the source of that quotation, too. This looks
to me like a good place to intercept him. When he learns I have a
base here, he'll hit it, sooner or later. And even if he doesn't,
we can pick up more information on him, when ships start coming in
here, than we would batting around all over the Old Federation."

Harkaman considered for a moment, then nodded. "Yes, if we could set
up a base like Nergal or Xochitl," he agreed. "There'll be four or
five ships, Space Vikings, traders, Gilgameshers and so on, on
either of those planets all the time. If we had the cargo Dunnan
took to space in the _Enterprise_, we could start a base like that.
But we haven't anything near what we need, and you know what Spasso
and Valkanhayn have."

"We can get it from Gram. As it stands, the investors in the Tanith
Adventure, from Duke Angus down, lost everything they put into it.
If they're willing to throw some good money after bad, they can get
it back, and a handsome profit to boot. And there ought to be
planets above the rowboat and ox-cart level not too far away that
could be raided for a lot of things we'd need."

"That's right; I know of half a dozen within five hundred light-years.
They won't be the kind Spasso and Valkanhayn are in the habit of
raiding, though. And besides machinery, we can get gold, and valuable
merchandise that could be sold on Gram. And if we could make a go of
it, you'd go farther hunting Dunnan by sitting here on Tanith than by
going looking for him. That was the way we used to hunt marsh pigs on
Colada, when I was a kid; just find a good place and sit down and wait."

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

They had Valkanhayn and Spasso aboard the _Nemesis_ for dinner; it
didn't take much guiding to keep the conversation on the subject of
Tanith and its resources, advantages and possibilities. Finally,
when they had reached brandy and coffee, Trask said idly:

"I believe, together, we could really make something out of this planet."

"That's what we've been telling you, all along," Spasso broke in
eagerly. "This is a wonderful planet--"

"It could be. All it has now is possibilities. We'd need a
spaceport, for one thing."

"Well, what's this, here?" Valkanhayn wanted to know.

"It was a spaceport," Harkaman told him. "It could be one again. And
we'd need a shipyard, capable of any kind of heavy repair work.
Capable of building a complete ship, in fact. I never saw a ship
come into a Viking base planet with any kind of a cargo worth
dickering over that hadn't taken some damage getting it. Prince
Viktor of Xochitl makes a good half of his money on ship repairs,
and so do Nikky Gratham on Jagannath and the Everrards on Hoth."

"And engine works, hyperdrive, normal space and pseudograv," Trask
added. "And a steel mill, and a collapsed-matter plant. And
robotic-equipment works, and--"

"Oh, that's out of all reason!" Valkanhayn cried. "It would take
twenty trips with a ship the size of this one to get all that stuff
here, and how'd we ever be able to pay for it?"

"That's the sort of base Duke Angus of Wardshaven planned. The
_Enterprise_, practically a duplicate of the _Nemesis_, carried
everything that would be needed to get it started, when she was
pirated."

"When she was--?"

"Now you're going to have to tell the gentlemen the truth,"
Harkaman chuckled.

"I intend to." He laid his cigar down, sipped some of his brandy,
and explained about Duke Angus' Tanith adventure. "It was part of a
larger plan; Angus wanted to gain economic supremacy for Wardshaven
to forward his political ambitions. It was, however, an entirely
practical business proposition. I was opposed to it, because I
thought it would be too good a proposition for Tanith and work to
the disadvantage of the home planet in the end." He told them about
the _Enterprise_, and the cargo of industrial and construction
equipment she carried, and then told them how Andray Dunnan had
pirated her.

"That wouldn't have annoyed me at all; I had no money invested in
the project. What did annoy me, to put it mildly, was that just
before he took the ship out, Dunnan shot up my wedding, wounded me
and my father-in-law, and killed the lady to whom I had been married
for less than half an hour. I fitted out this ship at my own
expense, took on Captain Harkaman, who had been left without a
command when the _Enterprise_ was pirated, and came out here to
hunt Dunnan down and kill him. I believe that I can do that best by
establishing a base on Tanith myself. The base will have to be
operated at a profit, or it can't be operated at all." He picked up
the cigar again and puffed slowly. "I am inviting you gentlemen to
join me as partners."

"Well, you still haven't told us how we're going to get the money to
finance it," Spasso insisted.

"The Duke of Wardshaven, and the others who invested in the original
Tanith adventure will put it up. It's the only way they can recover
what they lost on the _Enterprise_."

"But then, this Duke of Wardshaven will be running it, not us,"
Valkanhayn objected.

"The Duke of Wardshaven," Harkaman reminded him, "is on Gram. We are
here on Tanith. There are three thousand light-years between."

That seemed a satisfactory answer. Spasso, however, wanted to know
who would run things here on Tanith.

"We'll have to hold a meeting of all three crews," he began.

"We will do nothing of the kind," Trask told him. "I will be running
things here on Tanith. You people may allow your orders to be
debated and voted on, but I don't. You will inform your respective
crews to that effect. Any orders you give them in my name will be
obeyed without argument."

"I don't know how the men'll take that," Valkanhayn said.

"I know how they'll take it if they're smart," Harkaman told him.
"And I know what'll happen if they aren't. I know how you've been
running your ships, or how your ships' crews have been running you.
Well, we don't do it that way. Lucas Trask is owner, and I'm
captain. I obey his orders on what's to be done, and everybody else
obeys mine on how to do it."

Spasso looked at Valkanhayn, then shrugged. "That's how the man
wants it, Boake. You want to give him an argument? I don't."

"The first order," Trask said, "is that these people you have
working here are to be paid. They are not to be beaten by these
plug-uglies you have guarding them. If any of them want to leave,
they may do so; they will be given presents and furnished
transportation home. Those who wish to stay will be issued rations,
furnished with clothing and bedding and so on as they need it, and
paid wages. We'll work out some kind of a pay-token system and set
up a commissary where they can buy things."

Disks of plastic or titanium or something, stamped and
uncounterfeitable. Get Alvyn Karffard to see about that. Organize
work-gangs, and promote the best and most intelligent to foremen.
And those guards could be taken in hand by some ground-fighter
sergeant and given Sword-World weapons and tactical training; use
them to train others; they'd need a sepoy army of some sort. Even
the best of good will is no substitute for armed force,
conspicuously displayed and unhesitatingly used when necessary.

"And there'll be no more of this raiding villages for food or
anything else. We will pay for anything we get from any of the
locals."

"We'll have trouble about that," Valkanhayn predicted. "Our men
think anything a local has belongs to anybody who can take it."

"So do I," Harkaman said. "On a planet I'm raiding. This is our
planet, and our locals. We don't raid our own planet or our own
people. You'll just have to teach them that."




X


It took Valkanhayn and Spasso more time and argument to convince
their crews than Trask thought necessary. Harkaman seemed satisfied,
and so was Baron Rathmore, the Wardshaven politician.

"It's like talking a lot of uncommitted small landholders into
taking somebody's livery-and-maintenance," the latter said. "You
can't use too much pressure; make them think it's their own idea."

There were meetings of both crews, with heated arguments; Baron
Rathmore made frequent speeches, while Lord Trask of Tanith and
Admiral Harkaman--the titles were Rathmore's suggestion--remained
loftily aloof. On both ships, everybody owned everything in common,
which meant that nobody owned anything. They had taken over Tanith
on the same basis of diffused ownership, and nobody in either crew
was quite stupid enough to think that they could do anything with
the planet by themselves. By joining the _Nemesis_, it appeared that
they were getting something for nothing. In the end, they voted to
place themselves under the authority of Lord Trask and Admiral
Harkaman. After all, Tanith would be a feudal lordship, and the
three ships together a fleet.

Admiral Harkaman's first act of authority was to order a general
inspection of fleet units. He wasn't shocked by the condition of the
two ships, but that was only because he had expected much worse. They
were spaceworthy; after all, they had gotten here from Hoth under
their own power. They were only combat-worthy if the combat weren't
too severe. His original estimate that the _Nemesis_ could have
knocked both of them to pieces was, if anything, over-conservative.
The engines were only in fair shape, and the armament was bad.

"We aren't going to spend our time sitting here on Tanith," he told
the two captains. "This planet is a raiding base, and 'raiding' is
the operative word. And we are not going to raid easy planets. A
planet that can be raided with impunity isn't worth the time it takes
getting to it. We are going to have to fight on every planet we hit,
and I am not going to jeopardize the lives of the men under me,
which includes your crews as well as mine, because of under-powered
and under-armed ships."

Spasso tried to argue. "We've been getting along."

Harkaman cursed. "Yes. I know how you've been getting along;
chicken-stealing on planets like Set and Xipototec and Melkarth. Not
making enough to cover maintenance expenses; that's why your ship's
in the shape she is. Well, those days are over. Both ships ought to
have a full overhaul, but we'll have to skip that till we have a
shipyard of our own. But I will insist, at least, that your guns and
launchers are in order. And your detection equipment; you didn't get
a fix on the _Nemesis_ till we were less than twenty thousand miles
off-planet."

"We had better get the _Lamia_ in condition first," Trask said. "We
can put her on off-planet watch, instead of that pair of pinnaces."

       *       *       *       *       *

Work on the _Lamia_ started the next day, and considerable friction-heat
was generated between her officers and the engineers sent over from
the _Nemesis_. Baron Rathmore went aboard, and came back laughing.

"You know how that ship's run?" he asked. "There's a sort of soviet
of officers; chief engineer, exec, guns-and-missiles, astrogator and
so on. Spasso's just an animated ventriloquist's dummy. I talked to
all of them. None of them can pin me down to anything, but they
think we're going to heave Spasso out of command and appoint one of
them, and each one thinks he'll be it. I don't know how long that'll
last, it's a string-and-tape job like the one we're having to do on
the ship. It'll hold till we get something better."

"We'll have to get rid of Spasso," Harkaman agreed. "I think we'll
put one of our own people in his place. Valkanhayn can stay in
command of the _Space Scourge_; he's a spaceman. But Spasso's no
good for anything."

The local problem was complicated, too. The locals spoke Lingua
Terra of a sort, like every descendant of the race that had gone out
from the Sol system in the Third Century, but it was a barely
comprehensible sort. On civilized planets, the language had been
frozen unalterably in microbooks and voice tapes. But microbooks can
only be read and sound tapes heard with the aid of electricity, and
Tanith had lost that long ago.

Most of the people Spasso and Valkanhayn had kidnaped and enslaved
came from villages within a radius of five hundred miles. About half
of them wanted to be repatriated; they were given gifts of knives,
tools, blankets, and bits of metal which seemed to be the chief
standard of value and medium of exchange, and shipped home. Finding
their proper villages was not easy. At each such village, the news
was spread that the Space Vikings would hereafter pay for what they
received.

The _Lamia_ was overhauled as rapidly as possible. She was still
far from being a good ship, but she was much closer to being one than
before. She was fitted with the best detection equipment that could
be assembled, and put on orbit; Alvyn Karffard took command of her,
with some of Spasso's officers, some of Valkanhayn's, and a few from
the _Nemesis_. Harkaman was intending to use her for retraining of
all the _Lamia_ and _Space Scourge_ officers, and rotated them back
and forth.

[Illustration]

The labor guards, a score in number, were relieved of their duties,
issued Sword-World firearms, and given intensive training. The trade
tokens, stamps of colored plastic, were introduced, and a store was
set up where they could be exchanged for Sword-World items. After a
while, it dawned on the locals that the tokens could also be used
for trading among themselves; money seemed to have been one of the
adjuncts of civilization that had been lost along Tanith's downward
path. A few of them were able to use contragravity hand-lifters and
hand-towed lifter-skids; several were even learning to operate
things like bulldozers, at least to the extent of knowing which
lever or button did what. Give them a little time, Trask thought,
watching a gang at work down on the spaceport floor. It won't be
many years before half of them will be piloting aircars.

       *       *       *       *       *

As soon as the _Lamia_ was on orbital watch, the _Space Scourge_ was
set down at the spaceport and work started on her. It was decided
that Valkanhayn would take her to Gram; enough _Nemesis_ people
would go along to insure good faith on his part, and to talk to Duke
Angus and the Tanith investors. Baron Rathmore, and Paytrik Morland,
and several other Wardshaven gentlemen-adventurers for the latter
function; Alvyn Karffard to act as Valkanhayn's exec, with private
orders to supersede him in command if necessary, and Guatt Kirbey
to do the astrogating.

"We'll have to take the _Nemesis_ and the _Space Scourge_ out,
first, and make a big raid," Harkaman said. "We can't send the
_Space Scourge_ back to Gram empty. When Baron Rathmore and Lord
Valpry and the rest of them talk to Duke Angus and the Tanith
investors, they'll have to have a lot more than some travel films
of Tanith. They'll have to be able to show that Tanith is producing.
We ought to have a little money of our own to invest, too."

"But, Otto; both ships?" That worried Trask. "Suppose Dunnan comes
and finds nobody here but Spasso and the _Lamia_?"

"Chance we'll have to take. Personally, I think we have a year to a
year and a half before Dunnan shows up here. I know, we were fooled
trying to guess what he'd do before. But the sort of raid I have in
mind, we'll need two ships, and in any case, I don't want to leave
both those ships here while we're gone, even if you do."

"When it comes to that, I don't think I do, either. But we can't
trust Spasso here alone, can we?"

"We'll leave enough of our people to make sure. We'll leave
Alvyn--that'll mean a lot of work for me that he'd otherwise do,
on the ship. And Baron Rathmore, and young Valpry, and the men
who've been training our sepoys. We can shuffle things around and
leave some of Valkanhayn's men in place of some of Spasso's. We might
even talk Spasso into going along. That'll mean having to endure him
at our table, but it would be wise."

"Have you picked a place to raid?"

"Three of them. First, Khepera. That's only thirty light-years from
here. That won't amount to much; just chicken-stealing. It'll give
our green hands some relatively safe combat-training, and it'll give
us some idea of how Spasso's and Valkanhayn's people behave, and
give them confidence for the next job."

"And then?"

"Amaterasu. My information about Amaterasu is about twenty years
old. A lot of things can happen in twenty years. All I know of it--I
was never there myself--is it's fairly civilized--about like Terra
just before the beginning of the Atomic Era. No nuclear energy, they
lost that, and of course nothing beyond it, but they have hydroelectric
and solarelectric power, and nonnuclear jet aircraft, and some very good
chemical-explosive weapons, which they use very freely on each other.
It was last known to have been raided by a ship from Excalibur
twenty years ago."

"That sounds promising. And the third planet?"

"Beowulf. We won't take enough damage on Amaterasu to make any
difference there, but if we saved Amaterasu for last, we might
be needing too many repairs."

"It's like that?"

"Yes. They have nuclear energy. I don't think it would be wise to
mention Beowulf to Captains Spasso and Valkanhayn. Wait till we've
hit Khepera and Amaterasu. They may be feeling like heroes, then."




XI


Khepera left a bad taste in Trask's mouth. He was still tasting it
when the colored turbulence died out of the screen and left the gray
nothingness of hyperspace. Garvan Spasso--they had had no trouble in
inducing him to come along--was staring avidly at the screen as
though he could still see the ravished planet they had left.

"That was a good one; that was a good one!" he was crowing. He'd
said that a dozen times since they had lifted out. "Three cities in
five days, and all the stuff we gathered up around them. We took
over two million stellars."

And did ten times as much damage getting it, and there was no scale
of values by which to compute the death and suffering.

"Knock it off, Spasso. You said that before."

There was a time when he wouldn't have spoken to the fellow, or
anybody else, like that. Gresham's law, extended: Bad manners drive
out good manners. Spasso turned on him indignantly.

"Who do you think you are--?"

"He thinks he's Lord Trask of Tanith," Harkaman said. "He's right,
too; he is." He looked searchingly at Trask for a moment, then
turned back to Spasso. "I'm just as tired as he is of hearing you
pop your mouth about a lousy two million stellars. Nearer a million
and a half, but two million's nothing to pop about. Maybe it would
be for the _Lamia_, but we have a three-ship fleet and a planetary
base to meet expenses on. Out of this raid, a ground-fighter or an
able spaceman will get a hundred and fifty stellars. We'll get about
a thousand, ourselves. How long do you think we can stay in business
doing this kind of chicken-stealing."

"You call this chicken-stealing?"

"I call it chicken-stealing, and so'll you before we get back to
Tanith. If you live that long."

For a moment, Spasso was still affronted. Then, temporarily, his
vulpine face showed avaricious hope, and then apprehension.
Evidently he knew Otto Harkaman's reputation, and some of the things
Harkaman had done weren't his idea of an easy way to make money.

Khepera had been easy; the locals hadn't had anything to fight with.
Small arms, and light cannon which hadn't been able to fire more
than a few rounds. Wherever they had attempted resistance, the
combat cars had swooped in, dropping bombs and firing machine guns
and auto-cannon. Yet they had fought, bitterly and hopelessly--just
as he would have, defending Traskon.

Trask busied himself getting coffee and a cigarette from one of the
robots. When he looked up, Spasso had gone away, and Harkaman was
sitting on the edge of the desk, loading his short pipe.

"Well, you saw the elephant, Lucas," Harkaman said. "You don't seem
to have liked it."

"Elephant?"

"Old Terran expression I read somewhere. All I know is that an
elephant was an animal about the size of one of your Gram megatheres.
The expression means, experiencing something for the first time
which makes a great impression. Elephants must have been something
to see. This was your first Viking raid. You've seen it, now."

He'd been in combat before; he'd led the fighting-men of Traskon
during the boundary dispute with Baron Manniwel, and there were
always bandits and cattle rustlers. He'd thought it would be like
that. He remembered, five days, or was it five ages, ago, his
excited anticipation as the city grew and spread in the screen and
the _Nemesis_ came dropping down toward it. The pinnaces, his four
and the two from the _Space Scourge_, had gone spiraling out a
hundred miles beyond the city; the _Space Scourge_ had gone into
a tighter circle twenty miles from its center; the _Nemesis_ had
continued her relentless descent until she was ten miles from the
ground, before she began spewing out landing craft, and combat cars,
and the little egg-shaped one-man air-cavalry mounts. It had been
thrilling. Everything had gone perfectly; not even Valkanhayn's gang
had goofed.

Then the screenviews had begun coming in. The brief and hopeless
fight in the city. He could still see that silly little field gun,
it must have been around seventy or eighty millimeter, on a
high-wheeled carriage, drawn by six shaggy, bandy-legged beasts.
They had gotten it unlimbered and were trying to get it on a target
when a rocket from an aircar landed directly under the muzzle. Gun,
caisson, crew, even the draft team fifty yards behind, had simply
vanished.

Or the little company, some of them women, trying to defend the top
of a tall and half-ruinous building with rifles and pistols. One
air-cavalryman wiped them all out with his machine guns.

"They don't have a chance," he'd said, half-sick. "But they keep on
fighting."

"Yes; stupid of them, isn't it?" Harkaman, beside him, had said.

"What would you do in their place?"

"Fight. Try to kill as many Space Vikings as I could before they got
me. Terro-humans are all stupid like that. That's why we're human."

       *       *       *       *       *

If the taking of the city had been a massacre, the sack that had
followed had been a man-made Hell. He had gone down, along with
Harkaman, while the fighting, if it could be so called, was still
going on. Harkaman had suggested that the men ought to see him
moving about among them; for his own part, he had felt a compulsion
to share their guilt.

He and Sir Paytrik Morland had been on foot together in one of the
big hollow buildings that had stood since Khepera had been a Member
Republic of the Terran Federation. The air was acrid with smoke,
powder smoke and the smoke of burning. It was surprising, how much
would burn, in this city of concrete and vitrified stone. It was
surprising, too, how well-kept everything was, at least on the
ground level. These people had taken pride in their city.

They found themselves alone, in a great empty hallway; the noise and
horror of the sack had moved away from them, or they from it, and
then, when they entered a side hall, they saw a man, one of the
locals, squatting on the floor with the body of a woman cradled on
his lap. She was dead, half her head had been blown off, but he was
clasping her tightly, her blood staining his shirt, and sobbing
heartbrokenly. A carbine lay forgotten on the floor beside him.

"Poor devil," Morland said, and started forward.

"No."

Trask stopped him with his left hand. With his right, he drew his
pistol and shot the man dead. Morland was horrified.

"Great Satan, Lucas! Why did you do that?"

"I wish Andray Dunnan had done that for me." He thumbed the safety
on and holstered the pistol. "None of this would be happening if
he had. How many more happinesses do you think we've smashed here
today? And we don't even have Dunnan's excuse of madness."

The next morning, with everything of value collected and sent
aboard, they had started cross-country for five hundred miles to
another city, the first hundred over a countryside asmoke from
burning villages Valkanhayn's men had pillaged the night before.
There was no warning; Khepera had lost electricity and radio and
telegraph, and the spread of news was at the speed of one of the
beasts the locals insisted on calling horses. By midafternoon, they
had finished with that city. It had been as bad as the first one.

One thing, it was the center of a considerable cattle country. The
cattle were native to the planet, heavy-bodied unicorns the size of
a Gram bisonoid or one of the slightly mutated Terran carabaos on
Tanith, with long hair like a Terran yak. He had detailed a dozen of
the _Nemesis_ ground-fighters who had been vaqueros on his Traskon
ranches to collect a score of cows and four likely bulls, with
enough fodder to last them on the voyage. The odds were strongly
against any of them living to acclimate themselves to Tanith, but
if they did, they might prove to be one of the most valuable pieces
of loot from Khepera.

The third city was at the forks of a river, like Tradetown on
Tanith. Unlike it, this was a real metropolis. They should have
gone there first of all. They spent two days systematically pillaging
it. The Kheperans carried on considerable river-traffic, with
stern-wheel steamboats, and the waterfront was lined with warehouses
crammed with every sort of merchandise. Even better, the Kheperans
had money, and for the most part it was gold specie, and the bank
vaults were full of it.

Unfortunately, the city had been built since the fall of the
Federation and the climb up from the barbarism that had followed,
and a great deal of it was of wood. Fires started almost at once,
and it was almost completely on fire by the end of the second day.
It had been visible in the telescopic screen even after they were
out of atmosphere, a black smear until the turning planet carried
it into darkness and then a lurid glow.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It was a filthy business."

Harkaman nodded. "Robbery and murder always are. You don't have to
ask me who said that Space Vikings are professional robbers and
murderers, but who was it said that he didn't care how many planets
were raided and how many innocents massacred in the Old Federation?"

"A dead man. Lucas Trask of Traskon."

"You wish, now, that you'd kept Traskon and stayed on Gram?"

"No. If I had, I'd have spent every hour wishing I was doing what
I'm doing now. I can get used to this, I suppose."

"I think you will. At least, you kept your rations down. I didn't on
my first raid, and had bad dreams about it for a year." He gave his
coffee cup back to the robot and got to his feet. "Get a little
rest, for a couple of hours. Then draw some alcodote-vitamin pills
from the medic. As soon as things are secured, there'll be parties
all over the ship, and we'll be expected to look in on every one of
them, have a drink, and say 'Well done, boys.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

Elaine came to him, while he was resting. She looked at him in
horror, and he tried to hide his face from her, and then realized
that he was trying to hide it from himself.




XII


They came straight down on Eglonsby, on Amaterasu, the _Nemesis_
and the _Space Scourge_ side by side. The radar had picked them up
at point-five light-seconds; by this time the whole planet knew
they were coming, and nobody was wondering why. Paul Koreff was
monitoring at least twenty radio stations, assigning somebody to
each one as it was identified. What was coming in was uniformly
excited, some panicky, and all in fairly standard Lingua Terra.

Garvan Spasso was perturbed. So, in the communication screen from
the _Space Scourge_, was Boake Valkanhayn.

"They got radio, and they got radar," he clamored.

"Well, so what?" Harkaman asked. "They had radio and radar twenty
years ago, when Rock Morgan was here in the _Coalsack_. But they
don't have nuclear energy, do they?"

"Well, no. I'm picking up a lot of industrial electrical discharge,
but nothing nuclear."

"All right. A man with a club can lick a man with his fists. A man
with a gun can lick half a dozen with clubs. And two ships with
nuclear weapons can lick a whole planet without them. Think it's
time, Lucas?"

He nodded. "Paul, can you cut in on that Eglonsby station yet?"

"What are you going to do?" Valkanhayn wanted to know, against it
in advance.

"Summon them to surrender. If they don't, we will drop a hellburner,
and then we will pick out another city and summon it to surrender.
I don't think the second one will refuse. If we are going to be
murderers, we'll do it right, this time."

Valkanhayn was aghast, probably at the idea of burning an unlooted
city. Spasso was sputtering something about, "... Teach the dirty
Neobarbs a lesson--" Koreff told him he was switched on. He picked
up a hand-phone.

"Space Vikings _Nemesis_ and _Space Scourge_, calling the city of
Eglonsby. Space Vikings...."

He repeated it for over a minute; there was no reply.

"Vann," he called Guns-and-Missiles. "A subcrit display job, about
four miles over the city."

He laid the phone down and looked to the underside viewscreen. A
little later, a silvery shape dropped away from the ship's south
pole. The telescopic screen went off, and the unmagnified screen
darkened as the filters went on. Valkanhayn, aboard the other ship,
was shouting a warning about his own screens. The only unfiltered
screen aboard the _Nemesis_ was the one tuned to the falling
missile. The city of Eglonsby rushed upward in it, and then it went
suddenly dark. There was an orange-yellow blaze in the other
screens. After a while, the filters went off and the telescopic
screen went on again. He picked up the phone.

"Space Vikings calling Eglonsby; this is your last warning.
Communicate at once."

Less than a minute later, a voice came out of one of the speakers:

"Eglonsby calling Space Vikings. Your bomb has done great damage.
Will you hold your fire until somebody in authority can communicate
with you? This is the chief operator at the central State telecast
station; I have no authority to say anything to you, or discuss
anything."

"Oh, good, that sounds like a dictatorship," Harkaman was saying.
"Grab the dictator and shove a pistol in his face and you have
everything."

"There is nothing to discuss. Get somebody who has authority to
surrender the city to us. If this is not done within the hour,
the city and everybody in it will be obliterated."

Only minutes later, a new voice said:

"This is Gunsalis Jan, secretary to Pedrosan Pedro, President of
the Council of Syndics. We will switch President Pedrosan over as
soon as he can speak directly to the personage in supreme command
of your ships."

"That is myself; switch him to me at once."

After a delay of less than fifteen seconds they had President
Pedrosan Pedro.

"We are prepared to resist, but we realize what this would cost in
lives and destruction of property," he began.

"You don't begin to. Do you know anything about nuclear weapons?"

"From history; we have no nuclear power of any sort. We can find no
fissionables on this planet."

"The cost, as you put it, would be everything and everybody in
Eglonsby and for a radius of almost a hundred miles. Are you still
prepared to resist?"

The President of the Council of Syndics wasn't and said so. Trask
asked him how much authority his position gave him.

"I have all powers in any emergency. I think," the voice added
tonelessly, "that this is an emergency. The council will
automatically ratify any decision I make."

Harkaman depressed a button in front of him. "What I said;
dictatorship, with parliamentary false front."

"If he isn't a false-front dictator for some oligarchy." He motioned
to Harkaman to take his thumb off the button. "How large is this Council?"

"Sixteen, elected by the Syndicates they represent. There is the
Syndicate of Labor, the Syndicate of Manufacturers, the Syndicate
of Small Businesses, the...."

"Corporate State, First Century Pre-Atomic on Terra. Benny the Moose,"
Harkaman said. "Let's all go down and talk to them."

[Illustration]

When they were sure that the public had been warned to make no
resistance, the _Nemesis_ went down to two miles, bulking over
the center of the city. The buildings were low by the standards of
a contragravity-using people, the highest barely a thousand feet
and few over five hundred, and they were more closely set than
Sword-Worlders were accustomed to, with broad roadways between. In
several places there were queer arrangements of crossed roadways,
apparently leading nowhere. Harkaman laughed when he saw them.

"Airstrips. I've seen them on other planets where they've lost
contragravity. For winged aircraft powered by chemical fuel. I hope
we have time for me to look around, here. I'll bet they even have
railroads here."

The "great damage" caused by the bomb was about equal to the effect
of a medium hurricane; he had seen worse from high winds at Traskon.
Mostly it had been moral, which had been the kind intended.

They met President Pedrosan and the council of Syndics in a spacious
and well-furnished chamber near the top of one of the medium-high
buildings. Valkanhayn was surprised; in a loud aside he considered
that these people must be almost civilized. They were introduced.
Amaterasuan surnames preceded personal names, which hinted at a
culture and a political organization making much use of registration
by alphabetical list. They all wore garments which had the indefinable
but unmistakable appearance of uniforms. When they had all seated
themselves at a large oval table, Harkaman drew his pistol and used
the butt for a gavel.

[Illustration]

"Lord Trask, will you deal with these people directly?" he asked,
stiffly formal.

"Certainly, Admiral." He spoke to the President, ignoring the
others. "We want it understood that we control this city, and we
expect complete submission. As long as you remain submissive to us,
we will do no damage beyond removal of the things we wish to take
from it, and there will be no violence to any of your people, or any
indiscriminate vandalism. This visit we are paying you will cost you
heavily, make no mistake about that, but whatever the cost, it will
be a cheap price for avoiding what we might otherwise do."

The President and the Syndics exchanged relieved glances. Let
the taxpayers worry about the cost; they'd come out of it with
whole skins.

"You understand, we want maximum value and minimum bulk," he
continued. "Jewels, objects of art, furs, the better grades of
luxury goods of all kinds. Rare-element metals. And monetary metals,
gold and platinum. You have a metallic-based currency, I suppose?"

"Oh, no!" President Pedrosan was slightly scandalized. "Our currency
is based on services to society. Our monetary unit is simply called
a credit."

Harkaman snorted impolitely. Evidently he'd seen economic systems like
that before. Trask wanted to know if they used gold or platinum at all.

"Gold, to some extent, for jewelry." Evidently they weren't complete
economic puritans. "And platinum in industry, of course."

"If they want gold, they should have raided Stolgoland," one of the
Syndics said. "They have a gold-standard currency." From the way he
said it, he might have been accusing them of eating with their
fingers, and possibly of eating their own young.

"I know, the maps we're using for this planet are a few centuries old;
Stolgoland doesn't seem to appear on them."

"I wish it didn't appear on ours, either." That was General Dagró
Ector, Syndic for State Protection.

"It would have been a good thing for this whole planet if you'd
decided to raid them instead of us," somebody else said.

"It isn't too late for these gentlemen to make that decision,"
Pedrosan said. "I gather that gold is a monetary metal among your
people?" When Trask nodded, he continued: "It is also the basis of
the Stolgonian currency. The actual currency is paper, theoretically
redeemable in gold. In actuality, the circulation of gold has been
prohibited, and the entire gold wealth of the nation is concentrated
in vaults at three depositories. We know exactly where they are."

"You begin to interest me, President Pedrosan."

"I do? Well, you have two large spaceships and six smaller craft.
You have nuclear weapons, something nobody on this planet has. You
have contragravity, something that is hardly more than a legend
here. On the other hand, we have a million and a half ground-troops,
jet aircraft, armored ground-vehicles, and chemical weapons. If you
will undertake to attack Stolgoland, we will place this entire force
at your disposal; General Dagró will command them as you direct. All
that we ask is that, when you have loaded the gold hoards of
Stolgoland aboard your ships, you will leave our troops in
possession of the country."

       *       *       *       *       *

That was all there was to that meeting. There was a second one; only
Trask, Harkaman and Sir Paytrik Morland represented the Space Vikings,
and the Eglonsby government was represented by President Pedrosan
and General Dagró. They met more intimately, in a smaller and more
luxurious room in the same building.

"If you're going to declare war on Stolgoland, you'd better get
along with it," Morland advised.

"What?" Pedrosan seemed to have only the vaguest idea of what he was
talking about. "You mean, warn them? Certainly not. We will attack
them by surprise. It will be nothing but plain self-defense," he
added righteously. "The oligarchic capitalists of Stolgoland have
been plotting to attack us for years."

"Yes. If you had carried out your original intention of looting
Eglonsby, they would have invaded us the moment your ships lifted
out. It's exactly what I'd do in their place."

"But you maintain nominally friendly relations with them?"

"Of course. We are civilized. The peace-loving government and people
of Eglonsby...."

"Yes, Mr. President; I understand. And they have an embassy here?"

"They call it that!" cried Dagró. "It is a nest of vipers,
a plague-spot of espionage and subversion...!"

"We'll grab that ourselves, right away," Harkaman said. "You won't be
able to round up all their agents outside it, and if we tried to, it
would cause suspicion. We'll have to put up a front to deceive them."

"Yes. You will go on the air at once, calling on the people to
collaborate with us, and you will specifically order your troops
mobilized to assist us in collecting the tribute we are levying on
Eglonsby," Trask said. "In that way, if any Stolgonian spies see
your troops concentrated around our landing craft, they'll think
it's to help us load our loot."

"And we'll announce that a large part of the tribute will consist of
military equipment," Dagró added. "That will explain why our guns
and tanks are being loaded on your contragravity vehicles."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the Stolgonian embassy was seized by the Space Vikings, the
ambassador asked to be taken at once to their leader. He had a
proposition: If the Space Vikings would completely disable the army
of Eglonsby and admit Stolgonian troops when they were ready to
leave, the invaders would bring with them ten thousand kilos of
gold. Trask affected to be very hospitable to the offer.

Stolgoland lay across a narrow and shallow sea from the State of
Eglonsby; it was dotted with islands, and every one of them was, in
turn, dotted with oil wells. Petroleum was what kept the aircraft
and ground-vehicles of Amaterasu in operation; oil, rather than
ideology, was at the root of the enmity between the two nations.
Apparently the Stolgonian espionage in Eglonsby was completely
deceived, and the reports Trask allowed the captive ambassador to
make confirmed the deception. Hourly the Eglonsby radio stations
poured out exhortations to the people to co-operate with the Space
Vikings, with an occasional lamentation about the masses of war
materials being taken. Eglonsby espionage in Stolgoland was
similarly active. The Stolgonian armies were being massed at four
seaports on the coast facing Eglonsby, and there was a frantic
gathering of every sort of ship available. By this time, any
sympathy that Trask might have felt for either party had evaporated.

The invasion of Stolgoland started the fifth morning after their
arrival over Eglonsby. Before dawn, the six pinnaces went in, making
a wide sweep around the curvature of the planet and coming in from
the north, two to each of the three gold-troves. They were detected
by radar, eventually but too late for any effective resistance to
be organized. Two were even taken without a shot; by mid-morning all
three had been blown open and the ingots and specie were being removed.

The four seaports from whence the Stolgonian invasion of Eglonsby
was to have been launched were neutralized by nuclear bombing.
Neutralized was a nice word, Trask thought; there was no echo in it
of the screams of the still-living, maimed and burned and blinded,
around the fringes of ground-zero. The _Nemesis_ and the _Space
Scourge_, from landing craft and from the ships themselves, landed
Eglonsby troops on Stolgonopolis. While they were sacking the city,
with all the usual atrocities, the Space Vikings were loading the
gold, and anything else that was of more than ordinary value,
aboard the ships.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were still at it the next morning when President Pedrosan
arrived at the newly conquered capital, announcing his intention of
putting the Stolgonian chief of state and his cabinet on trial as
war criminals. Before sunset, they were back over Eglonsby. The loot
might run as high as a half-billion Excalibur stellars. Boake
Valkanhayn and Garvan Spasso were simply beyond astonishment
and beyond words.

The looting of Eglonsby then began.

They gathered up machinery, and stocks of steel and light-metal
alloys. The city was full of warehouses, and the warehouses were
crammed with valuables. In spite of the socialistic and egalitarian
verbiage behind which the government operated, there seemed to be a
numerous elite class and if gold were not a monetary metal it was
not despised for purposes of ostentation. There were several large
art museums. Vann Larch, their nearest approach to an art
specialist, took charge of culling the best from them.

And there was a vast public library. Into this Otto Harkaman
vanished, with half a dozen men and a contragravity scow. Its
historical section would be much poorer in the future.

President Pedrosan Pedro was on the radio from Stolgonopolis that night.

"Is this how you Space Vikings keep faith?" he demanded indignantly.
"You've abandoned me and my army here in Stolgoland, and you're
sacking Eglonsby. You promised to leave Eglonsby alone if I helped
you get the gold of Stolgoland."

"I promised nothing of the kind. I promised to help you take
Stolgoland. You've taken it," Trask told him. "I promised to avoid
unnecessary damage or violence. I've already hanged a dozen of my
own men for rape, murder and wanton vandalism. Now, we expect to be
out of here in twenty-four hours. You'd better be back here before
then. Your own people are starting to loot. We did not promise to
control them for you."

That was true. What few troops had been left behind, and the police,
were unable to cope with the mobs that were pillaging in the wake of
the Space Vikings. Everybody seemed to be trying to grab what he
could and let the Vikings be blamed for it. He had been able to keep
his own people in order. There had been at least a dozen cases of
rape and wanton murder, and the offenders had been promptly hanged.
None of their shipmates, not even the _Space Scourge_ company, seemed
resentful. They felt the culprits had deserved what they'd gotten;
not for what they'd done to the locals, but for disobeying orders.

A few troops had been flown in from Stolgoland by the time they had
gotten their vehicles stowed and were lifting out. They didn't seem
to be making much headway. Harkaman, who had gotten his load of
microbooks stowed and was at the command desk, laughed heartily.

"I don't know what Pedrosan'll do. Gehenna, I don't even know what
I'd do, if I'd gotten myself into a mess like that. He'll probably
bring half his army back, leave the other half in Stolgoland, and
lose both. Suppose we drop in, in about three or four years, just
out of curiosity. If we make twenty per cent of what we did this
time, the trip would pay for itself."

After they went into hyperspace and had the ship secured, the
parties lasted three Galactic standard days, and nobody was at all
sober. Harkaman was drooling over the mass of historical material he
had found. Spasso was jubilant. Nobody could call this chicken-stealing.
He kept repeating that as long as he was able to say anything. Khepera,
he conceded, had been. Lousy two or three million stellars; poo!




XIII


Beowulf was bad.

Valkanhayn and Spasso had both been opposed to the raid. Nobody
raided Beowulf; Beowulf was too tough. Beowulf had nuclear energy
and nuclear weapons and contragravity and normal-space craft, they
even had colonies on a couple of other planets of their system. They
had everything but hyperdrive. Beowulf was a civilized planet, and
you didn't raid civilized planets, not and get away with it.

And beside, hadn't they gotten enough loot on Amaterasu?

"No, we did not," Trask told them. "If we're going to make anything
out of Tanith, we're going to need power, and I don't mean windmills
and waterwheels. As you've remarked, Beowulf has nuclear energy.
That's where we get our plutonium and our power units."

So they went to Beowulf. They came out of hyperspace eight light-hours
from the F-7 star of which Beowulf was the fourth planet, and twenty
light-minutes apart. Guatt Kirbey made a microjump that brought the
ships within practical communicating distance, and they began making
plans in an intership screen conference.

"There are, or were, three chief sources of fissionable ores,"
Harkaman said. "The last ship to raid here and get away was Stefan
Kintour's _Princess of Lyonesse_, sixty years ago. He hit one on the
Antarctic continent; according to his account, everything there was
fairly new. He didn't mess things up too badly, and it ought to be
still operating. We'll go in from the south pole, and we'll have to
go in fast."

They shifted personnel and equipment. They would go in bunched, the
pinnaces ahead; they and the _Space Scourge_ would go down to the
ground, while the better-armed _Nemesis_ would hover above to fight
off local contragravity, shoot down missiles, and generally provide
overhead cover. Trask transferred to the _Space Scourge_, taking
with him Morland and two hundred of the _Nemesis_ ground-fighters.
Most of the single-mounts, landing craft and manipulators and
heavy-duty lifters went with him, jamming the decks around the
vehicle ports of Valkanhayn's ship.

They jumped in to six light-minutes, and while Valkanhayn's
astrogator was still fiddling with his controls they began sensing
radar and microray detection. When they came out again, they were
two light-seconds off the south pole, and half a dozen ships were
either in orbit or coming up from the planet. All normal-space
craft, of course, but some were almost as big as the _Nemesis_.

From there on, it was a nightmare.

Ships pounded at them with guns, and they pounded back. Missiles
went out, and counter-missiles stopped them in rapidly expanding and
quickly vanishing globes of light. Red lights flashed on the damage
board, and sirens howled and klaxons squawked. In the outside-view
screens, they saw the _Nemesis_ vanish in a blaze of radiance, and
then, while their hearts were still in their throats, come out of it
again. Red lights went off on the board as damage-control crews and
their robots sealed the breaches in the hull and pumped air back
into evacuated areas, and then more red lights came on.

Occasionally, he would glance toward Boake Valkanhayn, who sat
motionless in his chair, chewing a cigar that had gone out long ago.
He wasn't enjoying it, but he wasn't showing fear. Once a Beowulfer
vanished in a supernova flash, and when the ball of incandescence
widened to nothing the ship was gone. All Valkanhayn said was: "Hope
one of our boys did that."

They fought their way in and down, toward the atmosphere. Another
Beowulf ship blew up, a craft about the size of Spasso's _Lamia_.
A moment later, another; Valkanhayn was pounding the desk in front
of him with his fist and yelling: "That was one of ours! Find out
who launched it; get his name!"

Missiles were coming up from the planet, now. Valkanhayn's detection
officer was trying to locate the source. While he was trying, a big
melon-shaped thing fell away from the _Nemesis_, and in the jiggling,
radiation-distorted intership screen Harkaman's image was laughing.

"Hellburner just went off; target about 50° south, 25° east of the
sunrise line. That's where those missiles are coming from."

Counter-missiles sped toward the big metal melon; defense missiles,
robot-launched, met them. The hellburner's track was marked first
by expanding red and orange globes in airless space and then by
fire-puffs after it entered atmosphere. It vanished into the darkness
beyond the sunset, and then made sunlight of its own. It _was_ sunlight;
a Bethe solar-phoenix reaction, and it would sustain itself for hours.
He hoped it hadn't landed within a thousand miles of their objective.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ground operation was a nightmare of a different sort. He went down
in a command car, with Paytrik Morland and a couple of others. There
were missiles and gun batteries. There were darting patterns of flights
of combat vehicles, blazing gunfire, and single vehicles that shot past
or blew up in front of them. Robots on contragravity--military robots,
with missiles to launch, and working robots with only their own mass to
hurl, flung themselves mindlessly at them. Screens that went crazy from
radiation; speakers that jabbered contradictory orders. Finally, the
battle, which had raged in the air over two thousand square miles of
mines and refineries and reaction plants, became two distinct and
concentrated battles, one at the packing plant and storage vaults and
one at the power-unit cartridge factory.

Three pinnaces came down to form a triangle over each; the _Space
Scourge_ hung midway between, poured out a swarm of vehicles and big
claw-armed manipulators; armored lighters and landing craft shuttled
back and forth. The command car looped and dodged from one target to the
other; at one, keg-like canisters of plutonium, collapsium-plated and
weighing tons apiece, were coming out of the vaults, and at the other
lifters were bringing out loads of nuclear-electric power-unit
cartridges, some as big as a ten liter jar, to power a spaceship engine,
and some small as a round of pistol ammunition, for things like
flashlights.

Every hour or so, he looked at his watch, and it would be three or
four minutes later.

At last, when he was completely convinced that he had really been
killed, and was damned and would spend all eternity in this
fire-riven chaos, the _Nemesis_ began firing red flares and the
speakers in all the vehicles were signaling recall. He got aboard
the _Space Scourge_ somehow, after assuring himself that nobody who
was alive was left behind.

There were twenty-odd who weren't, and the sick bay was full of
wounded who had gone up with cargo, and more were being helped off
the vehicles as they were berthed. The car in which he had been
riding had been hit several times, and one of the gunners was
bleeding under his helmet and didn't seem aware of it. When he got
to the command room, he found Boake Valkanhayn, his face drawn and
weary, getting coffee from a robot and lacing it with brandy.

"That's it," he said, blowing on the steaming cup. It was the
battered silver one that had been in front of him when he had first
appeared in the _Nemesis'_ screen. He nodded toward the damage
screen; everything had been patched up, or the outer decks around
breached portions of the hull sealed. "Ship secure." He set down
the silver mug and lit a cigar. "To quote Garvan Spasso, 'Nobody
can call that chicken-stealing.'"

"No. Not even if you count Tizona giraffe-birds as chickens. That
Gram gum-pear brandy you're putting in that coffee? I'll have the
same. Just leave out the coffee."




XIV


The _Lamia_'s detection picked them up as soon as they were out of
the last microjump; Trask's gnawing fear that Dunnan might attack in
their absence had been groundless. Incredibly, he realized, they had
been gone only thirty-odd Galactic Standard days, and in that time
Alvyn Karffard had done an incredible amount of work.

He had gotten the spaceport completely cleared of rubble and debris,
and he had the woods cleared away from around it and the two tall
buildings. The locals called the city Rivvin; a few inscriptions
found here and there in it indicated that the original name had been
Rivington. He had done considerable mapping, in some detail of the
continent on which it was located and, in general, of the rest of
the planet. And he had established friendly relations with the
people of Tradetown and made friends with their king.

Nobody, not even those who had collected it, quite believed their
eyes when the loot was unloaded. The little herd of long haired
unicorns--the Khepera locals had called them kreggs, probably a
corruption of the name of some naturalist who had first studied
them--had come through the voyage and even the Battle of Beowulf
in good shape. Trask and a few of his former cattlemen from Traskon
watched them anxiously, and the ship's doctor, acting veterinarian,
made elaborate tests of vegetation they would be likely to eat.
Three of the cows proved to be with calf; these were isolated and
watched over with especial solicitude.

[Illustration]

The locals were inclined to take a poor view of the kreggs, at
first. Cattle ought to have two horns, one on either side, curved
back. It wasn't right for cattle to have only one horn, in the
middle, slanting forward.

Both ships had taken heavy damage. The _Nemesis_ had one pinnace
berth knocked open, and everybody was glad the Beowulfers hadn't
noticed that and gotten a missile inside. The _Space Scourge_ had
taken a hit directly on her south pole while lifting out from the
planet, and a good deal of the southern part of the ship was sealed
off when she came in. The _Nemesis_ was repaired as far as possible
and put on off-planet patrol, then they went to work on the _Space
Scourge_, transferring much of her armament to ground defense,
clearing out all the available cargo space, and repairing her hull
as far as possible. To repair her completely was a job for a regular
shipyard, like Alex Gorram's on Gram. And that was where the work
would be done.

Boake Valkanhayn would command her on the voyage to and from Gram.
Since Beowulf, Trask had not only ceased to dislike the man, but was
beginning to admire him. He had been a good man once, before ill
fortune which had been only partly of his own making had overtaken
him. He'd just let himself go and stopped caring. Now he had taken
hold of himself again. It had started showing after they had landed
on Amaterasu. He had begun to dress more neatly and speak more
grammatically; to look and act more like a spaceman and less like a
barfly. His men had begun to jump to obey when he gave an order. He
had opposed the raid on Beowulf, but that had been the dying
struggle of the chicken-thief he had been. He had been scared, going
in; well, who hadn't been, except a few greenhorns brave with the
valor of ignorance. But he had gone in, and fought his ship well,
and had held his station over the fissionables plant in a hell of
bombs and missile, and he had made sure everybody who had gone down
and who was still alive was aboard before he lifted out.

He was a Space Viking again.

Garvan Spasso wasn't, and never would be. He was outraged when he
heard that Valkanhayn would take his ship, loaded with much of the
loot of the three planets, to Gram. He came to Trask, fairly
spluttering about it.

"You know what'll happen?" he demanded. "He'll space out with that
cargo, and that'll be the last any of us'll hear of him again. He'll
probably take it to Joyeuse or Excalibur and buy himself a lordship
with it."

"Oh, I doubt that, Garvan. A number of our people are going
along--Guatt Kirbey will be the astrogator; you'd trust him,
wouldn't you? And Sir Paytrik Morland, and Baron Rathmore, and
Lord Valpry, and Rolve Hemmerding...." He was silent for a moment,
struck by an idea. "Would you be willing to make the trip in the
_Space Scourge_, too?"

Spasso would, very decidedly. Trask nodded.

"Good. Then we'll be sure nothing crooked is pulled," he said
seriously.

After Spasso was gone, he got in touch with Baron Rathmore.

"See to it that he gets as much money that's due him as possible,
when you get to Gram. And ask Duke Angus, as a favor to give him
some meaningless position with a suitably impressive title, Lord
Chamberlain of the Ducal Washroom, or something. Then he can prime
him with misinformation and give him an opportunity to sell it to
Omfray of Glaspyth. Then, of course, he could be contacted to sell
Omfray out to Angus. A couple of times around and somebody'll stick
a knife in him, and then we'll be rid of him for good."

       *       *       *       *       *

They loaded the _Space Scourge_ with gold from Stolgoland, and
paintings and statues from the art museums and fabrics and furs and
jewels and porcelains and plate from the markets of Eglonsby. They
loaded sacks and kegs of specie from Khepera. Most of the Khepera
loot wasn't worth hauling to Gram, but it was far enough in advance
of their own technologies to be priceless to the Tanith locals.

Some of these were learning simple machine operations, and a few
were able to handle contragravity vehicles that had been fitted with
adequate safety devices. The former slave guards had all become
sergeants and lieutenants in an infantry regiment that had been
formed, and the King of Tradetown borrowed some to train his own
army. Some genius in the machine shop altered a matchlock musket
to flintlock and showed the local gunsmiths how to do it.

The kreggs continued to thrive, after the _Space Scourge_ departed.
Several calves were born, and seemed to be doing well; the biochemistry
of Tanith and Khepera were safely alike. Trask had hopes for them.
Every Viking ship had its own carniculture vats, but men tired of
carniculture meat, and fresh meat was always in demand. Some day,
he hoped, kregg-beef would be an item of sale to ships putting in
on Tanith, and the long-haired hides might even find a market in
the Sword-Worlds. They had contragravity scows plying between
Rivington and Tradetown regularly, now, and air-lorries were linking
the villages. The boatmen of Tradetown rioted occasionally against
this unfair competition. And in Rivington itself, bulldozers and
power shovels and manipulators labored, and there was always a
rising cloud of dust over the city.

There was so much to do, and only a trifle under twenty-five
Galactic Standard hours in a day to do it. There were whole days
in which he never thought once of Andray Dunnan.

A hundred and twenty-five days to Gram, and a hundred and
twenty-five days back. They had long ago passed. Of course, there
would be the work of repairing the _Space Scourge_, the conferences
with the investors in the original Tanith Adventure, the business
of gathering the needed equipment for the new base. Even so, he was
beginning to worry a little. Worry about something as far out of his
control as the _Space Scourge_ was useless, he knew. He couldn't
help it, though. Even Harkaman, usually imperturbable, began to be
fretful, after two hundred and seventy days had passed.

They were relaxing in the living quarters they had fitted out at the
top of the spaceport building before retiring, both sprawled wearily
in chairs that had come from one of the better hotels of Eglonsby,
their drinks between them on a low table, the top of which was
inlaid with something that looked like ivory but wasn't. On the
floor beside it lay the plans for a reaction-plant and mass-energy
converter they would build as soon as the _Space Scourge_ returned
with equipment for producing collapsium-plated shielding.

"Of course, we could go ahead with it, now," Harkaman said.
"We could tear enough armor off the _Lamia_ to shield any kind
of a reaction plant."

That was the first time either of them had gotten close to the
possibility that the ship mightn't return. Trask laid his cigar in
the ashtray--it had come from President Pedrosan Pedro's private
office--and splashed a little more brandy into his glass.

"She'll be coming before long. We have enough of our people aboard
to make sure nobody else tries to take the ship. And I really
believe, now, that Valkanhayn can be trusted."

"I do, too. I'm not worried about what might happen on the ship.
But we don't know what's been happening on Gram. Glaspyth and
Didreksburg could have teamed up and jumped Wardshaven before
Duke Angus was ready to invade Glaspyth. Boake might be landing
the ship in a trap at Wardshaven."

"Be a sorry looking trap after it closed on him. That would be the
first time in history that a Sword-World was raided by Space Vikings."
Harkaman looked at his half-empty glass, then filled it to the top.
It was the same drink he had started with, just as a regiment that
has been decimated and recruited up to strength a few times is still
the same regiment.

The buzz of the communication screen--one of the few things in the
room that hadn't been looted somewhere--interrupted him. They both
rose; Harkaman, still carrying his drink, went to put it on. It was
a man on duty in the control room, overhead, reporting that two
emergences had just been detected at twenty light-minutes due north
of the planet. Harkaman gulped his drink and set down the empty glass.

"All right. You put out a general alert? Switch anything that comes
in over to this screen." He got out his pipe and was packing tobacco
into it mechanically. "They'll be out of the last microjump and
about two light-seconds away in a few minutes."

Trask sat down again, saw that his cigarette had burned almost to
the tip, and lit a fresh one from it, wishing he could be as calm
about it as Harkaman. Three minutes later, the control tower picked
up two emergences at a light-second and a half, a thousand or so
miles apart. Then the screen flickered, and Boake Valkanhayn was
looking out of it, from the desk in the newly refurbished command
room of the _Space Scourge_.

He was a newly refurbished Boake Valkanhayn, too. His heavily
braided captain's jacket looked like the work of one of the better
tailors on Gram, and on the breast was a large and ornate knight's
star, of unfamiliar design, bearing, among other things, the sword
and atom-symbol of the house of Ward.

"Prince Trask; Count Harkaman," he greeted. "_Space Scourge_, Tanith;
thirty-two hundred hours out of Wardshaven on Gram, Baron Valkanhayn
commanding, accompanied by chartered freighter _Rozinante_, Durendal,
Captain Morbes. Requesting permission and instructions to orbit in."

"Baron Valkanhayn?" Harkaman asked.

"That's right," Valkanhayn grinned. "And I have a vellum scroll the
size of a blanket to prove it. I have a whole cargo of scrolls. One
says you're Otto, Count Harkaman, and another says you're Admiral of
the Royal Navy of Gram."

"He did it!" Trask cried. "He made himself King of Gram!"

"That's right. And you're his trusty and well-loved Lucas, Prince
Trask, and Viceroy of his Majesty's Realm of Tanith."

Harkaman bristled at that. "The Gehenna you say. This is _our_ Realm
of Tanith."

"Is his Majesty making it worth while to accept his sovereignty?"
Trask asked. "That is, beside vellum scrolls?"

Valkanhayn was still grinning. "Wait till we start sending cargo
down. And wait till you see what's crammed into the other ship."

"Did Spasso come back with you?" Harkaman asked.

"Oh, no. Sir Garvan Spasso entered the service of his Majesty, King
Angus. He is Chief of Police at Glaspyth, now, and nobody can call
what he's doing there chicken-stealing, either. Any chickens he
steals, he steals the whole farm to get them."

That didn't sound good. Spasso could make King Angus' name stink all
over Glaspyth. Or maybe he'd allow Spasso to crush the adherents of
Omfray, and then hang him for his oppression of the people. He'd
read about somebody who'd done something like that, in one of
Harkaman's Old Terran history books.

       *       *       *       *       *

Baron Rathmore had stayed on Gram; so had Rolve Hemmerding. The
rest of the gentlemen-adventurers, all with shiny new titles of
nobility, had returned. From them, as the two ships were getting
into orbit, he learned what had happened on Gram since the _Nemesis_
had spaced out.

Duke Angus had announced his intention of carrying on with the
Tanith Adventure, and had started construction of a new ship at
the Gorram yards. This had served plausibly to explain all the
activities of preparation for the invasion of Glaspyth, and had
deceived Duke Omfray completely. Omfray had already started a ship
of his own; the entire resources of his duchy were thrown into an
effort to get her finished and to space ahead of the one Angus was
building. Work was going on frantically on her when the Wardshaven
invaders hit Glaspyth; she was now nearing completion as a unit of
the Royal Navy. Duke Omfray had managed to escape to Didreksburg;
when Angus' troops moved in on the latter duchy, he had escaped
again, this time off-planet. He was now eating the bitter bread of
exile at the court of his wife's uncle, the King of Haulteclere.

The Count of Newhaven, the Duke of Bigglersport, and the Lord of
Northport, all of whom had favored the establishment of a planetary
monarchy, had immediately acknowledged Angus as their sovereign. So,
with a knife at his throat, had the Duke of Didreksburg. Many other
feudal magnates had refused to surrender their sovereignty. That
might mean fighting, but Paytrik, now Baron, Morland, doubted it.

"The _Space Scourge_ stopped that," he said. "When they heard about
the base here, and saw what we'd shipped to Gram, they started
changing their minds. Only subjects of King Angus will be allowed
to invest in the Tanith Adventure."

As for accepting King Angus' annexation of Tanith and accepting his
sovereignty, that would also be advisable. They would need a Sword
World outlet for the loot they took or obtained by barter from other
Space Vikings, and until they had adequate industries of their own,
they would be dependent on Gram for many things which could not be
gotten by raiding.

"I suppose the King knows I'm not out here for my health, or
his profit?" he asked Lord Valpry, during one of the screen
conversations as the _Space Scourge_ was getting into orbit.
"My business out here is Andray Dunnan."

"Oh, yes," the Wardshaven noble replied. "In fact, he told me, in so
many words, that he would be most happy if you sent him his nephew's
head in a block of lucite. What Dunnan did touched his honor, too.
Sovereign princes never see any humor in things like that."

"I suppose he knows that sooner or later Dunnan will try to attack
Tanith?"

"If he doesn't, it isn't because I didn't tell him often enough. When
you see the defense armament we're bringing, you'll think he does."

It was impressive, but nothing to the engineering and industrial
equipment. Mining robots for use on the iron Moon of Tanith, and
normal-space transports for the fifty thousand mile run between
planet and satellite. A collapsed-matter producer; now they could
collapsium-plate their own shielding. A small, fully robotic, steel
mill that could be set up and operated on the satellite. Industrial
robots, and machinery to make machinery. And, best of all, two
hundred engineers and highly skilled technicians.

Quite a few industrial baronies on Gram would realize, before long,
what they had lost in those men. He wondered what Lord Trask of
Traskon would have thought about that.

The Prince of Tanith was no longer interested in what happened to
Gram. Maybe, if things prospered for the next century or so, his
successors would be ruling Gram by viceroy from Tanith.




XV


As soon as the _Space Scourge_ was unloaded, she was put on
off-planet watch; Harkaman immediately spaced out in the _Nemesis_,
while Trask remained behind. They began unloading the _Rozinante_,
after setting her down at Rivington Spaceport. After that was done,
her officers and crew took a holiday which lasted a month, until the
_Nemesis_ returned. Harkaman must have made quick raids on half a
dozen planets. None of the cargo he brought back was spectacularly
valuable, and he dismissed the whole thing as chicken-stealing, but
he had lost some men and the ship showed a few fresh scars. A good
deal of what was transshipped to the _Rozinante_ was manufactured
goods which would compete with merchandise produced on Gram.

"That load will be a come-down, after what the _Space Scourge_ took
back, but we didn't want to send the _Rozinante_ back empty," he
said. "One thing, I had time to do a little reading, between stops."

"The books from the Eglonsby library?"

"Yes. I learned a curious thing about Amaterasu. Do you know why that
planet was so extensively colonized by the Federation, when there
don't seem to be any fissionable ores? The planet produced gadolinium."

Gadolinium was essential to hyperdrive engines; the engines of a
ship the size of the _Nemesis_ required fifty pounds of it. On the
Sword-Worlds, it was worth several times its weight in gold. If they
still mined it, Amaterasu would repay a second visit.

When he mentioned it, Harkaman shrugged. "Why should they mine it?
There's only one thing it's good for, and you can't run a spaceship
on Diesel oil. I suppose the mines could be reopened, and new
refineries built, but...."

"We could trade plutonium for gadolinium. They have none of their
own. We could charge our own prices for it, and we wouldn't need to
tell them what gadolinium sells for on the Sword-Worlds."

"We could, if we could do business with anybody there, after what
we did to Eglonsby and Stolgoland. Where would we get plutonium?"

"Why do you think the Beowulfers don't have hyperships, when they
have everything else?"

Harkaman snapped his fingers. "By Satan, that's it!" Then he looked
at Trask in alarm. "Hey, you're not thinking of selling Amaterasu
plutonium and Beowulf gadolinium, are you?"

"Why not? We could make a big profit on both ends of the deal."

"You know what would happen next, don't you? There'd be ships from
both planets all over the place in a few years. We want that like
we want a hole in the head."

He couldn't see the objection. Tanith and Amaterasu and Beowulf
could work up a very good triangular trade; all three would profit.
It wouldn't cost men and ship-damage and ammunition, either. Maybe
a mutual defense alliance, too. Think about it later; there was too
much to do here on Tanith at present.

There had been mines on the Moon of Tanith before the collapse of
the Federation; they had been stripped of their equipment afterward,
while Tanith was still fighting a rearguard battle against barbarism,
but the underground chambers and man-made caverns could still be used,
and in time the mines were reopened and the steel mill put in, and
eventually ingots of finished steel were coming down by shuttle-craft.
In the meantime, the shipyard had been laid out and was taking shape.

The Gram ship _Queen Flavia_--she had been the one found unfinished
at Glaspyth--came in three months after the _Rozinante_ started
back; she must have been finished while Valkanhayn was still in
hyperspace. She carried considerable cargo, some of it superfluous
but all of it useful; everybody was investing in the Tanith Adventure
now, and the money had to be spent for something. Better, she brought
close to a thousand men and women; the leakage of brains and ability
from the Sword-Worlds was turning into a flood. Among them was Basil
Gorram. Trask remembered him as an insufferable young twerp, but he
seemed to be a good shipyard man. He very frankly predicted that
in a few years his father's yards at Wardshaven would be idle and
all the Tanith ships would be Tanith-built. A junior partner of
Lothar Ffayle's also came out, to establish a branch of the Bank of
Wardshaven at Rivington.

As soon as the _Queen Flavia_ had discharged her cargo and
passengers, she took on five hundred ground-fighters from the
_Lamia_, _Nemesis_ and _Space Scourge_ companies and spaced out on
a raiding voyage. While she was gone, the second ship, the one Duke
Angus had started at Wardshaven and King Angus had finished, the
_Black Star_, came in.

Trask was slightly incredulous at realizing that she had spaced out
from Gram almost exactly two years after the _Nemesis_ had departed.
He still hadn't any idea where Andray Dunnan was, or what he was
doing, or how to find him.

The news of the Gram base on Tanith spread slowly, first by the
scheduled liners and tramp freighters that linked the Sword-Worlds,
and then by trading ships and outbound Space Vikings to the Old
Federation. Two years and six months after the _Nemesis_ had come
out of hyperspace to find Boake Valkanhayn and Garvan Spasso on
Tanith, the first independent Space Viking came in, to sell a cargo
and get repairs. They bought his loot--he had been raiding some
planet rather above the level of Khepera and below that of
Amaterasu--and healed the wounds his ship had taken getting it. He
had been dealing with the Everrard family on Hoth, and professed
himself much more satisfied with the bargains he had gotten on
Tanith and swore to return.

He had never even heard of Andray Dunnan or the _Enterprise_.

It was a Gilgamesher that brought the first news.

He had first heard of Gilgameshers--the word was used
indiscriminately for a native of or a ship from Gilgamesh--on Gram,
from Harkaman and Karffard and Vann Larch and the others. Since
coming to Tanith, he had heard about them from every Space Viking,
never in complimentary and rarely in printable terms.

Gilgamesh was rated, with reservations, as a civilized planet though
not on a level with Odin or Isis or Baldur or Marduk or Aton or any
of the other worlds which had maintained the culture of the Terran
Federation uninterruptedly. Perhaps Gilgamesh deserved more credit;
its people had undergone two centuries of darkness and pulled
themselves out of it by their bootstraps. They had recovered all
the old techniques, up to and including the hyperdrive.

They didn't raid; they traded. They had religious objections to
violence, though they kept these within sensible limits, and were
able and willing to fight with fanatical ferocity in defense of
their home planet. About a century before, there had been a
five-ship Viking raid on Gilgamesh; one ship had returned and had
been sold for scrap after reaching a friendly base. Their ships went
everywhere to trade, and wherever they traded a few of them usually
settled, and where they settled they made money, sending most of it
home. Their society seemed to be a loose theo-socialism, and their
religion an absurd potpourri of most of the major monotheisms of the
Federation period, plus doctrinal and ritualistic innovations of
their own. Aside from their propensity for sharp trading, their
bigoted refusal to regard anybody not of their creed as more than
half human, and the maze of dietary and other taboos in which they
hid from social contact with others, made them generally disliked.

After their ship had gotten into orbit, three of them came down to
do business. The captain and his exec wore long coats, almost
knee-length, buttoned to the throat, and small white caps like
forage caps; the third, one of their priests, wore a robe with a
cowl, and the symbol of their religion, a blue triangle in a white
circle, on his breast. They all wore beards that hung down from
their cheeks, with their chins and upper lips shaved. They all had
the same righteous, disapproving faces, they all refused
refreshments of any sort, and they sat uneasily as though fearing
contamination from the heathens who had sat in their chairs before
them. They had a mixed cargo of general merchandise picked up here
and there on subcivilized planets, in which nobody on Tanith was
interested. They also had some good stuff--vegetable-amber and
flame-bird plumes from Irminsul; ivory or something very like it
from somewhere else; diamonds and Uller organic opals and
Zarathustra sunstones. They also had some platinum. They wanted
machinery, especially contragravity engines and robots.

[Illustration]

The trouble was, they wanted to haggle. Haggling, it seemed, was
the Gilgamesh planetary sport.

"Have you ever heard of a Space Viking ship named the _Enterprise_?"
he asked them, at the seventh or eighth impasse in the bargaining.
"She bears a crescent, light blue on black. Her captain's name is
Andray Dunnan."

"A ship so named, with such a device, raided Chermosh more than a
year ago," the priest-supercargo said. "Some of our people tarry on
Chermosh to trade. This ship sacked the city in which they were;
some of them lost heavily in world's goods."

"That's a pity."

The Gilgamesh priest shrugged. "It is as Yah the Almighty wills,"
he said, then brightened slightly. "The Chermoshers are heathens
and worshipers of false gods. The Space Vikings looted their temple
and destroyed it utterly; they carried away the graven images and
abominations. Our people bore witness that there was much wailing
and lamentation among the idolators."

       *       *       *       *       *

So that was the first entry on the Big Board. It covered,
optimistically, the whole of one wall in his office, and for some
time that one chalked note about the raid on Chermosh, and the date,
as nearly as it could be approximated, looked very lonely on it. The
captain of the _Black Star_ brought back material for a couple more.
He had put in on several planets known to be temporarily occupied by
Space Vikings, to barter loot, give his men some time off-ship, and
make inquiries, and he had names for a couple of planets raided by
the blue crescent ship. One was only six months old.

The way news filtered about in the Old Federation, that was
practically hot off the stove.

The owner-captain of the _Alborak_ had something to add, when he
brought his ship in six months later. He sipped his drink slowly,
as though he had limited himself to one and wanted to make it last
as long as possible.

"Almost two years ago, on Jagannath," he said. "The _Enterprise_ was
on orbit there, getting some light repairs. I met the man a few
times. Looks just like those pictures, but he's wearing a small
pointed beard, now. He'd sold a lot of loot. General merchandise,
precious and semiprecious stones, a lot of carved and inlaid
furniture that looked as though it had come from some Neobarb king's
palace, and some temple stuff. Buddhist; there were a couple of big
gold Dai-Butsus. His crew were standing drinks for all comers. Some
of them were pretty dark above the collar, as though they'd been on
a hot-star planet not too long before. And he had a lot of Imhotep
furs to sell, simply fabulous stuff."

"What kind of repairs? Combat damage?"

"That was my impression. He spaced out a little over a hundred hours
after I came in, in company with another ship. The _Starhopper_,
Captain Teodor Vaghn. The talk was that they were making a two-ship
raid somewhere." The captain of the _Alborak_ thought for a moment.
"One other thing. He was buying ammunition, everything from pistol
cartridges to hellburners. And he was buying all the air-and-water
recycling equipment, and all the carniculture and hydroponic
equipment, he could get."

That was something to know. He thanked the Space Viking, and then asked:

"Did he know, at the time, that I'm out here hunting for him?"

"If he did, nobody else on Jagannath did. I didn't hear about it,
myself, till six months afterward."

That evening, he played off the recording he had made of the
conversation for Harkaman and Valkanhayn and Karffard and some
of the others. Somebody instantly said:

"That temple stuff came from Chermosh. They're Buddhists, there.
That checks with the Gilgamesher's story."

"He got the furs on Imhotep; he traded for them," Harkaman said.
"Nobody gets anything off Imhotep by raiding. The planet's in the
middle of a glaciation, the land surface down to the fiftieth
parallel is iced over solid. There is one city, ten or fifteen
thousand, and the rest of the population is scattered around in
settlements of a couple of hundred all along the face of the
glaciers. They're all hunters and trappers. They have some
contragravity, and when a ship comes in, they spread the news by
radio and everybody brings his furs to town. They use telescope
sights, and everybody over ten years old can hit a man in the head
at five hundred yards. And big weapons are no good; they're too well
dispersed. So the only way to get anything out of them is to trade
for it."

"I think I know where he was," Alvyn Karffard said. "On Imhotep,
silver is a monetary metal. On Agni, they use silver for sewer-pipe.
Agni is a hot-star planet, class B-3 sun. And on Agni they are
tough, and they have good weapons. That could be where the
_Enterprise_ took that combat damage."

That started an argument as to whether he'd gone to Chermosh first.
It was sure that he had gone to Agni and then Imhotep. Guatt Kirbey
tried to figure both courses.

"It doesn't tell us anything, either way," he said at length. "Chermosh
is away off to the side from Agni and Imhotep in either case."

"Well, he does have a base, somewhere, and it's not on any
Terra-type planet," Valkanhayn said. "Otherwise, what would he want
with all that air-and-water and hydroponic and carniculture stuff?"

The Old Federation area was full of non-Terra-type planets, and why
should anybody bother going to any of them? Any planet that wasn't
oxygen-atmosphere, six to eight thousand miles in diameter, and
within a narrow surface-temperature range, wasn't worth wasting time
on. But a planet like that, if one had the survival equipment, would
make a wonderful hideout.

"What sort of a captain is this Teodor Vaghn?" he asked. "A good
one," Harkaman said promptly. "He has a nasty streak--sadistic--but
he knows his business and he has a good ship and a well-trained
crew. You think he and Dunnan have teamed up?"

"Don't you? I think, now that he has a base, Dunnan is getting
a fleet together."

"He'll know we're after him by now," Vann Larch said. "And he knows
where we are, and that puts him one up on us."




XVI


So Andray Dunnan was haunting him again. Tiny bits of information
came in--Dunnan's ship had been on Hoth, on Nergal, selling loot.
Now he sold for gold or platinum, and bought little, usually arms
and ammunition. Apparently his base, wherever it was, was fully
self-sufficient. It was certain, too, that Dunnan knew he was being
hunted. One Space Viking who had talked with him quoted him as
saying: "I don't want any trouble with Trask, and if he's smart he
won't look for any with me." This made him all the more positive
that somewhere Dunnan was building strength for an attack on Tanith.
He made it a rule that there should always be at least two ships in
orbit off Tanith in addition to the _Lamia_, which was on permanent
patrol, and he installed more missile-launching stations both on the
moon and on the planet.

There were three ships bearing the Ward swords and atom-symbol, and
a fourth building on Gram. Count Lionel of Newhaven was building
one of his own, and three big freighters shuttled across the three
thousand light-years between Tanith and Gram. Sesar Karvall, who had
never recovered from his wounds, had died; Lady Lavina had turned
the barony and the business over to her brother, Burt Sandrasan,
and gone to live on Excalibur. The shipyard at Rivington was
finished, and now they had built the landing-legs of Harkaman's
_Corisande II_, and were putting up the skeleton.

And they were trading with Amaterasu, now. Pedrosan Pedro had been
overthrown and put to death by General Dagró Ector during the
disorders following the looting of Eglonsby; the troops left behind
in Stolgoland had mutinied and made common cause with their late
enemies. The two nations were in an uneasy alliance, with several
other nations combining against them, when the _Nemesis_ and the
_Space Scourge_ returned and declared peace against the whole
planet. There was no fighting; everybody knew what had happened to
Stolgoland and Eglonsby. In the end, all the governments of Amaterasu
joined in a loose agreement to get the mines reopened and resume
production of gadolinium, and to share in the fissionables
being imported in exchange.

It had been harder, and had taken a year longer, to do business with
Beowulf. The Beowulfers had a single planetary government, and they
were inclined to shoot first and negotiate afterward, a natural
enough attitude in view of experiences of the past. However, they
had enough old Federation-period textbooks still in microprint to
know what could be done with gadolinium. They decided to write off
the past as fair fight and no bad blood, and start over again.

It would be some years before either planet had hyperships of their
own. In the meantime, both were good customers, and rapidly becoming
good friends. A number of young Amaterasuans and Beowulfers had come
to Tanith to study various technologies.

The Tanith locals were studying, too. In the first year, Trask
had gathered the more intelligent boys of ten to twelve from each
community and begun teaching them. In the past year, he had sent
the most intelligent of them off to Gram to school. In another
five years, they'd be coming home to teach; in the meantime, he
was bringing teachers to Tanith from Gram. There was a school
at Tradetown, and others in some of the larger villages, and
at Rivington there was something that could almost be called a
college. In another ten years or so, Tanith would be able to
pretend to the status of civilization.

       *       *       *       *       *

If only Andray Dunnan and his ships didn't come too soon. They would
be beaten off, he was confident of that; but the damage Tanith would
take, in the defense, would set back his work for years. He knew all
too well what Space Viking ships could do to a planet. He'd have to
find Dunnan's base, smash it, destroy his ships, kill the man
himself, first. Not to avenge that murder six years ago on Gram;
that was long ago and far away, and Elaine was vanished, and so was
the Lucas Trask who had loved and lost her. What mattered now was
planting and nurturing civilization on Tanith.

But where would he find Dunnan, in two hundred billion cubic
light-years? Dunnan had no such problem. He knew where his enemy was.

And Dunnan was gathering strength. The _Yo-Yo_, Captain Vann
Humfort; she had been reported twice, once in company with the
_Starhopper_, and once with the _Enterprise_. She bore a blazon of
a feminine hand dangling a planet by a string from one finger; a
good ship, and an able, ruthless captain. The _Bolide_; she and the
_Enterprise_ had made a raid on Ithunn. The Gilgameshers had settled
there and one of their ships had brought that story in.

And he recruited two ships at once on Melkarth, and there was a good
deal of mirth about that among the Tanith Space Vikings.

Melkarth was strictly a poultry planet. Its people had sunk to the
village-peasant level; they had no wealth worth taking or carrying
away. It was, however, a place where a ship could be set down, and
there were women, and the locals had not lost the art of distillation,
and made potent liquors. A crew could have fun there, much less
expensively than on a regular Viking base planet, and for the last
eight years a Captain Nial Burrik, of the _Fortuna_, had been occupying
it, taking his ship out for occasional quick raids and spending most
of the time living from day to day almost on the local level. Once
in a while, a Gilgamesher would come in to see if he had anything to
trade. It was a Gilgamesher who brought the story to Tanith, and it
was almost two years old when he told it.

"We heard it from the people of the planet, the ones who live where
Burrik had his base. First, there was a trading ship came in. You
may have heard of her; she is the one called the _Honest Horris_."

Trask laughed at that. Her captain, Horris Sasstroff, called himself
"Honest Horris," a misnomer which he had also bestowed on his ship.
He was a trader of sorts. Even the Gilgameshers despised him, and
not even a Gilgamesher would have taken a wretched craft like the
_Honest Horris_ to space.

"He had been to Melkarth before," the Gilgamesher said. "He and
Burrik are friends." He pronounced that like a final and damning
judgment of both of them. "The story the locals told our brethren
of the _Fairdealer_ was that the _Honest Horris_ was landed beside
Burrik's ship for ten days, when two other ships came in. They said
one had the blue crescent badge, and the other bore a green monster
leaping from one star to another."

The _Enterprise_ and the _Starhopper_. He wondered why they'd gone
to a planet like Melkarth. Maybe they knew in advance whom they'd
find there.

"The locals thought there would be fighting, but there was not.
There was a great feast, of all four crews. Then everything of
value was loaded aboard the _Fortuna_, and all four ships lifted
and spaced out together. They said Burrik left nothing of any worth
whatever behind; they were much disappointed at that."

"Have any of them been back since?"

All three Gilgameshers, captain, exec, and priest, shook their heads.

"Captain Gurrash of the _Fairdealer_ said it had been over a year
before his ship put in there. He could still see where the landing
legs of the ships had pressed into the ground, but the locals said
they had not been back."

That made two more ships about which inquiries must be made. He
wondered, for a moment, why in Gehenna Dunnan would want ships like
that; they must make the _Space Scourge_ and the _Lamia_ as he had
first seen them look like units of the Royal Navy of Excalibur. Then
he became frightened, with an irrational retrospective fright at
what might have happened. It could have, too, at any time in the
last year and a half; either or both of those ships could have come
in on Tanith completely unsuspected. It was only by the sheerest
accident that he had found out, even now, about them.

Everybody else thought it was a huge joke. They thought it would be
a bigger joke if Dunnan sent those ships to Tanith now, when they
were warned and ready for them.

There were other things to worry about. One was the altering attitude of
his Majesty Angus I. When the _Space Scourge_ returned, the newly-titled
Baron Valkanhayn brought with him, along with the princely title and the
commission as Viceroy of Tanith, a most cordial personal audiovisual
greeting, warm and friendly. Angus had made it seated at his desk, bare
headed and smoking a cigarette. The one which had come on the next ship
out was just as cordial, but the King was not smoking and wore a small
gold-circled cap-of-maintenance. By the time they had three ships in
service on scheduled three-month arrivals, a year and a half later, he
was speaking from his throne, wearing his crown and employing the first
person plural for himself and finally the third person singular for
Trask. By the end of the fourth year, there was no audiovisual message
from him in person, and a stiff complaint from Rovard Grauffis to the
effect that His Majesty felt it unseemly for a subject to address his
sovereign while seated, even by audiovisual. This was accompanied by a
rather apologetic personal message from Grauffis--now Prime Minister--to
the effect that His Majesty felt compelled to stand on his royal dignity
at all times, and that, after all, there was a difference between the
position and dignity of the Duke of Wardshaven and that of the Planetary
King of Gram.

Prince Trask of Tanith couldn't quite see it. The King was simply
the first nobleman of the planet. Even kings like Rodolf of Excalibur
or Napolyon of Flamberge didn't try to be anything more. Thereafter,
he addressed his greetings and reports to the Prime Minister, always
with a personal message, to which Grauffis replied in kind.

Not only the form but also the content of the messages from Gram
underwent change. His Majesty was most dissatisfied. His Majesty was
deeply disappointed. His Majesty felt that His Majesty's colonial
realm of Tanith was not contributing sufficiently to the Royal
Exchequer. And his Majesty felt that Prince Trask was placing
entirely too much emphasis upon trade and not enough upon raiding;
after all, why barter with barbarians when it was possible to take
what you wanted from them by force?

And there was the matter of the _Blue Comet_, Count Lionel of
Newhaven's ship. His Majesty was most displeased that the Count of
Newhaven was trading with Tanith from his own spaceport. All goods
from Tanith should pass through the Wardshaven spaceport.

"Look, Rovard," he told the audiovisual camera which was recording
his reply to Grauffis. "You saw the _Space Scourge_ when she came
in, didn't you? That's what happens to a ship that raids a planet
where there's anything worth taking. Beowulf is lousy with
fissionables; they'll give us all the plutonium we can load, in
exchange for gadolinium, which we sell them at about twice
Sword-World prices. We trade plutonium on Amaterasu for gadolinium,
and get it for about half Sword-World prices." He pressed the
stop-button, until he could remember the ancient formula. "You may
quote me as saying that whoever has advised His Majesty that that
isn't good business is no friend to His Majesty or to the Realm.

"As for the complaint about the _Blue Comet_; as long as she is
owned and operated by the Count of Newhaven, who is a stockholder
in the Tanith Adventure, she has every right to trade here."

He wondered why His Majesty didn't stop Lionel of Newhaven from
sending the _Blue Comet_ out from Gram. He found out from her
skipper, the next time she came in.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He doesn't dare, that's why. He's King as long as the great lords
like Count Lionel and Joris of Bigglersport and Alan of Northport
want him to be. Count Lionel has more men and more guns and
contragravity than he has, now, and that's without the help he'd get
from everybody else. Everything's quiet on Gram now, even the war on
Southmain Continent's stopped. Everybody wants to keep it that way.
Even King Angus isn't crazy enough to do anything to start a war.
Not yet, anyhow."

"Not _yet_?"

The captain of the _Blue Comet_, who was one of Count Lionel's
vassal barons, was silent for a moment.

"You ought to know, Prince Trask," he said. "Andray Dunnan's
grandmother was the King's mother. Her father was old Baron Zarvas
of Blackcliffe. He was what was called an invalid, the last twenty
years of his life. He was always attended by two male nurses about
the size of Otto Harkaman. He was also said to be slightly
eccentric."

The unfortunate grandfather of Duke Angus had always been a subject
nice people avoided. The unfortunate grandfather of King Angus was
probably a subject everybody who valued their necks avoided.

Lothar Ffayle had also come out on the _Blue Comet_. He was just as
outspoken.

"I'm not going back. I'm transferring most of the funds of the Bank
of Wardshaven out here; from now on, it'll be a branch of the Bank
of Tanith. This is where the business is being done. It's getting
impossible to do business at all in Wardshaven. What little business
there is to do."

"Just what's been happening?"

"Well, taxation, first. It seems the more money came in from here,
the higher taxes got on Gram. Discriminatory taxes, too; pinched the
small landholding and industrial barons and favored a few big ones.
Baron Spasso and his crowd."

"Baron Spasso, now?"

Ffayle nodded. "Of about half of Glaspyth. A lot of the Glaspyth
barons lost their baronies--some of them their heads--after Duke
Omfray was run out. It seems there was a plot against the life of
His Majesty. It was exposed by the zeal and vigilance of Sir Garvan
Spasso, who was elevated to the peerage and rewarded with the lands
of the conspirators."

"You said business was bad, as business?"

Ffayle nodded again. "The big Tanith boom has busted. It got
oversold; everybody wanted in on it. And they should never have
built those two last ships, the _Speedwell_ and the _Goodhope_;
the return on them didn't justify it. Then, you're creating your
own industries and building your own equipment and armament here;
that's caused a slump in industry on Gram. I'm glad Lavina Karvall
has enough money invested to live on. And finally, the consumers'
goods market is getting flooded with stuff that's coming in from
here and competing with Gram industry."

Well, that was understandable. One of the ships that made the
shuttle-trip to Gram would carry enough in her strong rooms, in gold
and jewels and the like, to pay a handsome profit on the voyage. The
bulk-goods that went into the cargo holds was practically taking a
free ride, so anything on hand, stuff that nobody would ordinarily
think of shipping in interstellar trade, went aboard. A two thousand
foot freighter had a great deal of cargo space.

Baron Trask of Traskon hadn't even begun to realise what Tanith base
was going to cost Gram.

[Illustration][Illustration]




XVII


As might be expected, the Beowulfers finished their hypership first.
They had started with everything but a little know-how which had
been quickly learned. Amaterasu had had to begin by creating the
industry they needed to create the industry they needed to build a
ship. The Beowulf ship--she was named _Viking's Gift_--came in on
Tanith five and a half years after the _Nemesis_ and the _Space
Scourge_ had raided Beowulf; her skipper had fought a normal-drive
ship in that battle. Beside plutonium and radioactive isotopes, she
carried a general cargo of the sort of luxury-goods unique to
Beowulf which could always find a market in interstellar trade.

After selling the cargo and depositing the money in the Bank of
Tanith, the skipper of the _Viking's Gift_ wanted to know where
he could find a good planet to raid. They gave him a list, none
too tough but all slightly above the chicken-stealing level, and
another list of planets he was _not_ to raid; planets with which
Tanith was trading.

Six months later they learned that he had showed up on Khepera, with
which they were now trading, and had flooded the market there with
plundered textiles, hardware, ceramics and plastics. He had bought
kregg-meat and hides.

"You see what you did, now?" Harkaman clamored. "You thought you
were making a customer; what you made was a competitor."

"What I made was an ally. If we ever do find Dunnan's planet, we'll
need a fleet to take it. A couple of Beowulf ships would help. You
know them; you fought them, too."

Harkaman had other worries. While cruising in _Corisande II_, he had
come in on Vitharr, one of the planets where Tanith ships traded, to
find it being raided by a Space Viking ship based on Xochitl. He had
fought a short but furious ship-action, battering the invader until
he was glad to hyper out. Then he had gone directly to Xochitl,
arriving on the heels of the ship he had beaten, and had had it out
both with the captain and Prince Viktor, serving them with an
ultimatum to leave Tanith trade-planets alone in the future.

"How did they take it?" Trask asked, when he returned to report.

"Just about the way you would have. Viktor said his people were
Space Vikings, not Gilgameshers. I told him we weren't Gilgameshers,
either, as he'd find out on Xochitl the next time one of his ships
raided one of our planets. Are you going to back me up? Of course,
you can always send Prince Viktor my head, and an apology--"

"If I have to send him anything, I'll send him a sky full of ships
and a planet full of hellburners. You did perfectly right, Otto;
exactly what I'd have done in your place."

There the matter rested. There were no more raids by Xochitl ships
on any of their trade-planets. No mention of the incident was made
in any of the reports sent back to Gram. The Gram situation was
deteriorating rapidly enough. Finally, there was an audiovisual
message from Angus himself; he was seated on his throne, wearing
his crown, and he began speaking from the screen abruptly:

"We, Angus, King of Gram and Tanith, are highly displeased with our
subject, Lucas, Prince and Viceroy of Tanith; we consider ourselves
very badly served by Prince Trask. We therefore command him to return
to Gram, and render to us account of his administration of our colony
and realm of Tanith."

After some hasty preparations, Trask recorded a reply. He was sitting
on a throne, himself, and he wore a crown just as ornate as King Angus',
and robes of white and black Imhotep furs.

"We, Lucas, Prince of Tanith," he began, "are quite willing to
acknowledge the suzerainty of the King of Gram, formerly Duke of
Wardshaven. It is our earnest desire, if possible, to remain at
peace and friendship with the King of Gram, and to carry on trade
relations with him and with his subjects.

"We must, however, reject absolutely any efforts on his part to
dictate the internal policies of our realm of Tanith. It is our
earnest hope,"--dammit, he'd said "earnest," he should have thought
of some other word--"that no act on the part of his Majesty the King
of Gram will create any breach in the friendship existing between
his realm and ours."

       *       *       *       *       *

Three months later, the next ship, which had left Gram while King
Angus' summons was still in hyperspace, brought Baron Rathmore.
Shaking hands with him as he left the landing craft, Trask wanted to
know if he'd been sent out as the new Viceroy. Rathmore started to
laugh and ended by cursing vilely.

"No. I've come out to offer my sword to the King of Tanith," he said.

"Prince of Tanith, for the time being," Trask corrected. "The sword,
however, is most acceptable. I take it you've had all of our blessed
sovereign you can stomach?"

"Lucas, you have enough ships and men here to take Gram," Rathmore
said. "Proclaim yourself King of Tanith and then lay claim to the
throne of Gram and the whole planet would rise for you."

Rathmore had lowered his voice, but even so the open landing stage
was no place for this sort of talk. He said so, ordered a couple
of the locals to collect Rathmore's luggage, and got him into a
hall-car, taking him down to his living quarters. After they were
in private, Rathmore began again:

"It's more than anybody can stand! There isn't one of the old great
nobility he hasn't alienated, or one of the minor barons, the
landholders and industrialists, the people who were always the
backbone of Gram. And it goes from them down to the commonfolk.
Assessments on the lords, taxes on the people, inflation to meet
the taxes, high prices, debased coinage. Everybody's being beggared
except this rabble of new lords he has around him, and that slut of
a wife and her greedy kinfolk...."

Trask stiffened. "You're not speaking of Queen Flavia, are you?"
he asked softly.

Rathmore's mouth opened slightly. "Great Satan, don't you know? No,
of course not; the news would have come on the same ship I did. Why,
Angus divorced Flavia. He claimed that she was incapable of giving
him an heir to the throne. He remarried immediately."

The girl's name meant nothing to Trask; he did know of her father, a
Baron Valdiva. He was lord of a small estate south of the Ward lands
and west of Newhaven. Most of his people were out-and-out bandits
and cattle-rustlers, and he was as close to being one himself as
he could get.

"Nice family he's married into. A credit to the dignity of the
throne."

"Yes. You wouldn't know this Lady-Demoiselle Evita; she was only
seventeen when you left Gram, and hadn't begun to acquire a
reputation outside her father's lands. She's made up for lost time
since, though. And she has enough uncles and aunts and cousins and
ex-lovers and what-not to fill out an infantry regiment, and every
one of them's at court with both hands out to grab everything they
can."

"How does Duke Joris like this?" The Duke of Bigglersport was Queen
Flavia's brother. "I daresay he's less than delighted."

"He's hiring mercenaries, is what he's doing, and buying combat
contragravity. Lucas, why don't you come back? You have no idea what
a reputation you have on Gram, now. Everybody would rally to you."

He shook his head, "I have a throne, here on Tanith. On Gram I want
nothing. I'm sorry for the way Angus turned out, I thought he'd make
a good King. But since he's made an intolerable King, the lords and
people of Gram will have to get rid of him for themselves. I have my
own tasks, here."

Rathmore shrugged. "I was afraid that would be it," he said. "Well,
I offered my sword; I won't take it back. I can help you in what
you're doing on Tanith."

       *       *       *       *       *

The captain of the free Space Viking _Damnthing_ was named
Roger-fan-Morvill Esthersan, which meant that he was some
Sword-Worlder's acknowledged bastard by a woman of one of the Old
Federation planets. His mother's people could have been Nergalers;
he had coarse black hair, a mahogany-brown skin, and red-brown,
almost maroon, eyes. He tasted the wine the robot poured for him
and expressed appreciation, then began unwrapping the parcel he
had brought in.

"Something I found while raiding on Tetragrammaton," he said.
"I thought you might like to have it. It was made on Gram."

It was an automatic pistol, with a belt and holster. The leather was
bisonoid-hide; the buckle of the belt was an oval enameled with a
crescent, pale blue on black. The pistol was a plain 10-mm military
model with grooved plastic grips; on the receiver it bore the stamp
of the House of Hoylbar, the firearms manufacturers of Glaspyth.
Evidently it was one of the arms Duke Omfray had provided for Andray
Dunnan's original mercenary company.

"Tetragrammaton?" He glanced over to the Big Board; there was no
previous report from that planet. "How long ago?"

"I'd say about three hundred hours. I came from there directly, less
than two hundred and fifty hours. Dunnan's ships had left the planet
three days before I got there."

That was practically sizzling hot. Well, something like that had to
happen, sooner or later. The Space Viking was asking him if he knew
what sort of a place Tetragrammaton was.

Neobarbarian, trying to recivilize in a crude way. Small population,
concentrated on one continent; farming and fisheries. A little heavy
industry, in a small way, at a couple of towns. They had some nuclear
power, introduced a century or so ago by traders from Marduk, one of
the really civilized planets. They still depended on Marduk for
fissionables; their export product was an abominably-smelling
vegetable oil which furnished the base for delicate perfumes, and
which nobody was ever able to synthesize properly.

"I heard they had steel mills in operation, now," the half-breed
Space Viking said. "It seems that somebody on Rimmon has just
re-invented the railroad, and they need more steel than they can
produce for themselves. I thought I'd raid Tetragrammaton for steel
and trade it on Rimmon for a load of heaven-tea. When I got there,
though, the whole planet was in a mess; not raiding, but plain
wanton destruction. The locals were just digging themselves out of
it when I landed. Some of them, who didn't think they had anything
at all left to lose, gave me a fight. I captured a few of them, to
find out what had happened. One of them had that pistol; he said
he'd taken it off a Space Viking he'd killed. The ships that raided
them were the _Enterprise_ and the _Yo-Yo_. I knew you'd want to
hear about it. I got some of the locals' stories on tape."

"Well, thank you. I'll want to hear those tapes. Now, you say you
want steel?"

"Well, I haven't any money. That's why I was going to raid
Tetragrammaton."

"Nifflheim with the money; your cargo's paid for already. This,"
he said, touching the pistol, "and whatever's on the tapes."

       *       *       *       *       *

They played off the tapes that evening. They weren't particularly
informative. The locals who had been interrogated hadn't been in
actual contact with Dunnan's people except in combat. The man who
had been carrying the 10-mm Hoylbar was the best witness of the lot,
and he knew little. He had caught one of them alone, shot him from
behind with a shotgun, taken his pistol, and then gotten away as
quickly as he could. They had sent down landing craft, it seemed,
and said they wanted to trade; then something must have happened,
nobody knew what, and they had begun a massacre and sacked the town.
After returning to their ships, they had opened fire with nuclear
missiles.

"Sounds like Dunnan," Hugh Rathmore said in disgust. "He just went
kill-crazy. The bad blood of Blackcliffe."

"There are funny things about this," Boake Valkanhayn said. "I'd say
it was a terror-raid, but who in Gehenna was he trying to terrorize?"

"I wondered about that, too." Harkaman frowned. "This town where he
landed seems, such as it was, to have been the planetary capital.
They just landed, pretending friendship, which I can't see why they
needed to pretend, and then began looting and massacring. There
wasn't anything of real value there; all they took was what the men
could carry themselves or stuff into their landing craft, and they
did that because they have what amounts to a religious taboo
against landing anywhere and leaving without stealing something.
The real loot was at these two other towns; a steel mill and big
stocks of steel at one, and all that skunk-apple oil at the other.
So what did they do? They dropped a five-megaton bomb on each one,
and blew both of them to Em-See-Square. That was a terror-raid pure
and simple, but as Boake inquires, just who were they terrorizing?
If there were big cities somewhere else on the planet, it would
figure. But there aren't. They blew out the two biggest cities,
and all the loot in them."

[Illustration]

"Then they wanted to terrorize somebody off the planet."

"But nobody'd hear about it off-planet," somebody protested.

"The Mardukans would; they trade with Tetragrammaton," the
acknowledged bastard of somebody named Morvill said. "They have
a couple of ships a year there."

"That's right," Trask agreed. "Marduk."

"You mean, you think Dunnan's trying to terrorize _Marduk_?" Valkanhayn
demanded. "Great Satan, even he isn't crazy enough for that!"

Baron Rathmore started to say something about what Andray Dunnan
was crazy enough to do, and what his uncle was crazy enough to do.
It was just one of the cracks he had been making since he'd come
to Tanith and didn't have to look over his shoulder while he was
making them.

"I think he is, too," Trask said. "I think that is exactly what he
is doing. Don't ask me why; as Otto is fond of remarking, he's crazy
and we aren't, and that gives him an advantage. But what have we
gotten, since those Gilgameshers told us about his picking up
Burrik's ship and the _Honest Horris_? Until today, we've heard
nothing from any other Space Viking. What we have gotten was stories
from Gilgameshers about raids on planets where they trade, and every
one of them is also a planet where Marduk ships trade. And in every
case, there has been little or nothing reported about valuable loot
taken. The stories are all about wanton and murderous bombings. I
think Andray Dunnan is making war on Marduk."

"Then he's crazier than his grandfather and his uncle both!"
Rathmore cried.

"You mean, he's making a string of terror-raids on their trade
planets, hoping to pull the Mardukan space-navy away from the home
planet?" Harkaman had stopped being incredulous. "And when he gets
them all lured away, he'll make a fast raid?"

"That's what I think. Remember our fundamental postulate: Dunnan is
crazy. Remember how he convinced himself that he was the rightful
heir to the ducal crown of Wardshaven?" And remember his insane
passion for Elaine; he pushed that thought hastily from him. "Now,
he's convinced that he's the greatest Space Viking in history. He
has to do something worthy of that distinction. When was the last
time anybody attacked a civilized planet? I don't mean Gilgamesh,
I mean a planet like Marduk."

"A hundred and twenty years ago; Prince Havilgar of Haulteclere, six
ships, against Aton. Two ships got back. He didn't. Nobody's tried
it since," Harkaman said.

"So Dunnan the Great will do it. I hope he tries," he surprised
himself by adding. "That's provided I find out what happened. Then
I could stop thinking about him."

There was a time when he had dreaded the possibility that somebody
else might kill Dunnan before he could.




XVIII


Seshat, Obidicut, Lugaluru, Audhumla.

The young man elevated by his father's death in the Dunnan raid to
the post of hereditary President of the democratic Republic of
Tetragrammaton had been sure that the Marduk ships which came to
his planet traded also on those. There had been some difficulty
about making contact, and the first face-to-face meeting had begun
in an atmosphere of bitter distrust on his part. They had met out
of doors; around them, spread wrecked and burned buildings, and
hastily constructed huts and shelters, and wide spaces of charred
and slagged rubble.

"They blew up the steel mill here, and the oil-refinery at Jannsboro.
They bombed and strafed the little farm-towns and villages. They
scattered radioactives that killed as many as the bombing. And after
they had gone away, this other ship came."

"The _Damnthing_? She bore the head of a beast with three very big horns?"

"That's the one. They did a little damage, at first. When the
captain found out what had happened to us, he left some food and
medicines for us." Roger-fan-Morvill Esthersan hadn't mentioned that.

"Well, we'd like to help you, if we can. Do you have nuclear power?
We can give you a little equipment. Just remember it of us, when
you're back on your feet; we'll be back to trade later. But don't
think you owe us anything. The man who did this to you is my enemy.
Now, I want to talk to every one of your people who can tell me
anything at all...."

Seshat was the closest; they went there first. They were too late.
Seshat had had it already, and on the evidence of the radioactivity
counters, not too long ago. Four hundred hours at most. There had
been two hellburners; the cities on which they had fallen were
still-smoking pits literally burned into the ground and the bedrock
below, at the center of five hundred mile radii of slag and lava and
scorched earth and burned forests. There had been a planetbuster; it
had started a major earthquake. And half a dozen thermonuclears.
There were probably quite a few survivors--a human planetary
population is extremely hard to exterminate completely--but within
a century they'd be back to the loincloth and the stone hatchet.

"We don't even know Dunnan did it, personally," Paytrik Morland said.
"For all we know, he's down in an air-tight cave city on some planet
nobody ever heard of, sitting on a golden throne, surrounded by a harem."

He had begun to suspect that Dunnan was doing something of just the
sort. The Greatest Space Viking of History would naturally found a
Space Viking empire.

"An emperor goes out to look his empire over, now and then; I don't
spend all my time on Tanith. Say we try Audhumla next. It's the
farthest away. We might get there while he's still shooting up
Obidicut and Lugaluru. Guatt, figure us a jump for it."

When the colored turbulence washed away and the screen cleared,
Audhumla looked like Tanith or Khepera or Amaterasu or any other
Terra-type planet, a big disk brilliant with reflected sunlight and
glowing with starlit and moonlit atmosphere on the other. There was
a single rather large moon, and, in the telescopic screen, the usual
markings of seas and continents and rivers and mountain-ranges. But
there was nothing to show....

Oh, yes; lights on the darkened side, and from the size they must be
vast cities. All the available data for Audhumla was long out of
date; a considerable civilization must have developed in the last
half dozen centuries.

Another light appeared, a hard blue-white spark that spread into a
larger, less brilliant yellow light. At the same time, all the
alarm-devices in the command-room went into a pandemonium of jangling
and flashing and squawking and howling and shouting. Radiation.
Energy-release. Contragravity distortion effects. Infra-red output. A
welter of indecipherable radio and communication-screen signals. Radar
and scanner-ray beams from the planet.

Trask's fist began hurting; he found that he had been pounding
the desk in front of him with it. He stopped it.

"We caught him, we caught him!" he was yelling hoarsely. "Full speed
in, continuous acceleration, as much as we can stand. We'll worry
about decelerating when we're in shooting distance."

The planet grew steadily larger; Karffard was taking him at his word
about continuous acceleration. There'd be a Gehenna of a bill to pay
when they started decelerating. On the planet, more bombs were going
off just outside atmosphere beyond the sunset line.

"Ship observed. Altitude about a hundred to five hundred
miles--hundreds, not thousands--35° North Latitude, 15° west of
the sunset line. Ship is under fire, bomb explosions near her,"
a voice whooped.

Somebody else was yelling that the city lights were really burning
cities, or burning forests. The first voice, having stopped, broke
in again:

"Ship is visible in telescopic screen, just at the sunset line. And
there's another ship detected but not visible, somewhere around the
equator, and a third one somewhere out of sight, we can just get the
fringe of her contragravity field around the planet."

That meant there were two sides, and a fight. Unless Dunnan had
picked up a third ship, somewhere. The telescopic view shifted;
for a moment the planet was completely off-screen, and then its
curvature came into the screen against a star-scattered background.
They were almost in to two thousand miles now; Karffard was yelling
to stop acceleration and trying to put the ship into a spiral orbit.
Suddenly they caught a glimpse of one of the ships.

"She's in trouble." That was Paul Koreff's voice. "She's leaking air
and water vapor like crazy."

"Well, is she a good guy or a bad guy?" Morland was yelling back, as
though Koreff's spectroscopes could distinguish. Koreff ignored that.

"Another ship making signal," he said. "She's the one coming up over
the equator. Sword-World impulse code; her communication-screen
combination, and an identify-yourself."

Karffard punched out the combination as Koreff furnished it. While
Trask was desperately willing his face into immobility, the screen
lighted. It wasn't Andray Dunnan; that was a disappointment. It was
almost as good, though. His henchman, Sir Nevil Ormm.

"Well, Sir Nevil! A pleasant surprise," he heard himself saying.
"We last met on the terrace at Karvall House, did we not?"

For once, the paper-white face of Andray Dunnan's _âme damnée_
showed expression, but whether it was fear, surprise, shock, hatred,
anger, or what combination of them, Trask could no more than guess.

"Trask! Satan curse you...!"

Then the screen went blank. In the telescopic screen, the other ship
came on unfalteringly. Paul Koreff, who had gotten more data on
mass, engine energy-output and dimensions, was identifying her as
the _Enterprise_.

"Well, go for her! Give her everything!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They didn't need the order; Vann Larch was speaking rapidly into his
hand-phone, and Alvyn Karffard was hurling his voice all over the
_Nemesis_, warning of sudden deceleration and direction change, and
while he was speaking, things in the command room began sliding. In
the telescopic screen, the other ship was plainly visible; he could
see the oval patch of black with the blue crescent, and in his
screen Dunnan would be seeing the sword-impaled skull of the
_Nemesis_.

If only he could be sure Dunnan was there to see it. If it had only
been Dunnan's face, instead of Ormm's, that he had seen in the
screen. As it was, he couldn't be sure, and if one of the missiles
that were already going out made a lucky hit, he might never be
sure. He didn't care who killed Dunnan, or how. All he wanted was
to know that Dunnan's death had set him free from a self-assumed
obligation that was now meaningless to him.

The _Enterprise_ launched counter-missiles; so did the _Nemesis_.
There were momentarily unbearable flashes of pure energy and from
them globes of incandescence spread and vanished. Something must
have gotten through; red lights flashed on the damage board. It had
been something heavy enough even to jolt the huge mass of the
_Nemesis_. At the same time, the other ship took a hit from
something that would have vaporized her had she not been armored in
collapsium. Then, as they passed close together, guns hammered back
and forth along with missiles, and then the _Enterprise_ was out of
sight around the horizon.

Another ship, the size of Otto Harkaman's _Corisande II_, was
approaching; she bore a tapering, red-nailed feminine hand dangling
a planet by a string. They rushed toward each other, planting a
garden of evanescent fire-flowers between them; they pounded one
another with guns, and then they sped apart. At the same time, Paul
Koreff was picking up an impulse-code signal from the third,
crippled, ship; a screen combination. Trask punched it out as
he received it.

A man in space armor was looking out of the screen. That was bad,
if they had to suit up in the command room. They still had air;
his helmet was off, but it was attached and hinged back. On his
breastplate was a device of a dragonlike beast perched with its tail
around a planet, and a crown above. He had a thin, high-cheeked
face, with a vertical wrinkle between his eyes, and a clipped blond
mustache.

"Who are you, stranger. You're fighting my enemies; does that make
you a friend."

"I'm a friend of anybody who owns Andray Dunnan his enemy.
Sword-World ship _Nemesis_; I'm Prince Lucas Trask of Tanith,
commanding."

"Royal Mardukan ship _Victrix_." The thin-faced man gave a wry
laugh. "Not been living up to her name so well. I'm Prince Simon
Bentrik, commanding."

"Are you still battle-worthy?"

"We can fire about half our guns; we still have a few missiles left.
Seventy per cent of the ship's sealed off, and we've been holed in a
dozen places. We have power enough for lift and some steering-way.
We can't make lateral way except at the expense of lift."

Which made the _Victrix_ practically a stationary target. He yelled
over his shoulder at Karffard to cut speed all he could without
tearing things apart.

"When that cripple comes into view, start circling around her. Get
into a tight circle above her." He turned back to the man in the
screen. "If we can get ourselves slowed down enough, we'll do all we
can to cover you."

"All you can is all you can; thank you, Prince Trask."

"Here comes the _Enterprise_!" Karffard shouted, with obscenely
blasphemous embellishments. "She hairpinned on us."

"Well, do something about her!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Vann Larch was already doing it. The _Enterprise_ had taken damage
in the last exchange; Koreff's spectroscopes showed her halo-ed with
air and water vapor. Her instruments would be getting the same
story from the _Nemesis_; wedge-shaped segments extending six to
eight decks in were sealed off in several places. Then the only
thing that could be seen with certainty was the blaze of mutually
destroying missiles between. The short-range gun duel began and
ended as they passed.

In the screen, he had seen a fat round-nosed thing come up from the
_Victrix_, curving far out ahead of the passing _Enterprise_. She
was almost out of sight around the planet when she ran head-on into
it, and vanished in an awesome blaze. For a moment, he thought she
had been destroyed, then she lurched into sight and went around the
curvature of Audhumla.

Trask and the Mardukan were shaking hands with themselves at each
other in their screens; everybody in the _Nemesis_ command room was
screaming: "Well shot, _Victrix_! Well shot!"

Then the _Yo-Yo_ was coming around again, and Vann Larch was saying,
"Gehenna with this fooling around! I'll fix the expurgated
unprintability!"

He yelled orders--a jumble of code letters and numbers--and things
began going out. Most of them blew up in space. Then the _Yo-Yo_
blew up, very quietly, as things do where there is no air to carry
shock- and sound-waves, but very brilliantly. There was brief
daylight all over the night side of the planet.

"That was our planetbuster," Larch said. "I don't know what we'll
use on Dunnan."

"I didn't know we had one," Trask admitted.

"Otto had a couple built on Beowulf. The Beowulfers are good nuclear
weaponeers."

The _Enterprise_ came back, hastily, to see what had blown up. Larch
put off another entertainment of small stuff, with a fifty megaton
thermonuclear, viewscreen-piloted, among them. It had its own
arsenal of small missiles, and it got through. In the telescopic
screen, a jagged hole was visible just below the equator of the
_Enterprise_, the edges curling outward. Something, possibly a heavy
missile in an open tube, ready for launching, had gone off inside
her. What the inside of the ship was like, or how many of her
company were still alive, was hard to guess.

There were some, and her launchers were still spewing out missiles.
They were intercepted and blew up. The hull of the _Enterprise_
bulked huge in the guidance-screen of the missile and filled it; the
jagged crater that had obliterated the bottom of Dunnan's blue
crescent blazon spread to fill the whole screen. The screen went
milky white as the pickup went off.

All the other screens blazed briefly, until their filters went on.
Even afterward, they glared like the cloud-veiled sun of Gram at
high noon. Finally, when the light-intensity had dropped and the
filters went off, there was nothing left of the _Enterprise_ but an
orange haze.

Somebody--Paytrik, Baron Morland, he saw--was pounding him on the
back and screaming inarticulately in his ear. A dozen space-armored
officers with planet-perched dragons on their breasts were crowding
beside Prince Bentrik in the screen from the _Victrix_, whooping
like drunken bisonoid-herders on payday night.

"I wonder," he said, almost inaudibly, "if I'll ever know if Andray
Dunnan was on that ship."




XIX


Prince Trask of Tanith and Prince Simon Bentrik were dining together
on an upper terrace of what had originally been the mansion house of
a Federation period plantation. It had been a number of other things
since; now it was the municipal building of a town that had grown
around it, which had, somehow, escaped undamaged from the Dunnan
blitz. Normally about five or ten thousand, the place was now jammed
with almost fifty thousand homeless refugees from half a dozen other
towns that had been destroyed, overflowing the buildings and
crowding into a sprawling camp of hastily built huts and shelters,
and already permanent buildings were going up to accommodate them.
Everybody, locals, Mardukans and Space Vikings, had been busy with
the work of relief and reconstruction; this was the first meal the
two commanders had been able to share in any leisure at all. Prince
Bentrik's enjoyment of it was somewhat impaired by the fact that
from where he sat he could see, in the distance, the sphere of his
disabled ship.

"I doubt we can get her off-planet again, let alone into hyperspace."

"Well, we'll get you and your crew to Marduk in the _Nemesis_,
then." They were both speaking loudly, above the clank and clatter
of machinery below. "I hope you didn't think I'd leave you stranded
here."

"I don't know how either of us will be received. Space Vikings
haven't been exactly popular on Marduk, lately. They may thank you
for bringing me back to stand trial," Bentrik said bitterly. "Why,
I'd have anybody shot who let his ship get caught as I did mine.
Those two were down in atmosphere before I knew they'd come out of
hyperspace."

"I think they were down on the planet before your ship arrived."

"Oh, that's ridiculous, Prince Trask!" the Mardukan cried. "You
can't hide a ship on a planet. Not from the kind of instruments we
have in the Royal Navy."

"We have pretty fair detection ourselves," Trask reminded him.
"There's one place where you can do it. At the bottom of an ocean,
with a thousand or so feet of water over her. That's where I was
going to hide the _Nemesis_, if I got here ahead of Dunnan."

Prince Bentrik's fork stopped half way to his mouth. He lowered it
slowly to his plate. That was a theory he'd like to accept, if he
could.

"But the locals. They didn't know about it."

"They wouldn't. They have no off-planet detection of their own. Come
in directly over the ocean, out of the sun, and nobody'd see the ship."

"Is that a regular Space Viking trick?"

"No. I invented it myself, on the way from Seshat. But if Dunnan
wanted to ambush your ship, he'd have thought of it, too. It's the
only practical way to do it."

Dunnan, or Nevil Ormm; he wished he knew, and was afraid he would go
on wishing all his life.

Bentrik started to pick up his fork again, changed his mind, and
sipped from his wineglass instead.

"You may find you're quite welcome on Marduk, at that," he said.
"These raids have only been a serious problem in the last four
years. I believe, as you do, that this enemy of yours is responsible
for all of them. We have half the Royal Navy out now, patrolling our
trade-planets. Even if he wasn't aboard the _Enterprise_ when you
blew her up, you've put a name on him and can tell us a good deal
about him." He set down the wineglass. "Why, if it weren't so utterly
ridiculous, one might even think he was making war on Marduk."

From Trask's viewpoint, it wasn't ridiculous at all. He merely
mentioned that Andray Dunnan was psychotic and let it go at that.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Victrix_ was not completely unrepairable, although quite beyond
the resources at hand. A fully equipped engineer-ship from Marduk
could patch her hull and replace her Dillinghams and her Abbot
lift-and-drive engines and make her temporarily spaceworthy, until
she could be gotten to a shipyard. They concentrated on repairing
the _Nemesis_, and in another two weeks she was ready for the voyage.

The six hundred hour trip to Marduk passed pleasantly enough. The
Mardukan officers were good company, and found their Space Viking
opposite numbers equally so. The two crews had become used to
working together on Audhumla, and mingled amicably off watch,
interesting themselves in each other's hobbies and listening avidly
to tales of each other's home planets. The Space Vikings were
surprised and disappointed at the somewhat lower intellectual level
of the Mardukans. They couldn't understand that; Marduk was supposed
to be a civilized planet, wasn't it? The Mardukans were just as
surprised, and inclined to be resentful, that the Space Vikings all
acted and talked like officers. Hearing of it, Prince Bentrik was
also puzzled. Fo'c'sle hands on a Mardukan ship belonged definitely
to the lower orders.

"There's still too much free land and free opportunity on the
Sword-Worlds," Trask explained. "Nobody does much bowing and
scraping to the class above him; he's too busy trying to shove
himself up into it. And the men who ship out as Space Vikings are
the least class-conscious of the lot. Think my men may have trouble
on Marduk about that? They'll all insist on doing their drinking in
the swankiest places in town."

[Illustration]

"No. I don't think so. Everybody will be so amazed that Space Vikings
aren't twelve feet tall, with three horns like a Zarathustra damnthing
and a spiked tail like a Fafnir mantichore that they won't even notice
anything less. Might do some good, in the long run. Crown Prince Edvard
will like your Space Vikings. He's much opposed to class distinctions
and caste prejudices. Says they have to be eliminated before we can
make democracy really work."

The Mardukans talked a lot about democracy. They thought well of it;
their government was a representative democracy. It was also a
hereditary monarchy, if that made any kind of sense. Trask's efforts
to explain the political and social structure of the Sword-Worlds
met the same incomprehension from Bentrik.

"Why, it sounds like feudalism to me!"

"That's right; that's what it is. A king owes his position to the
support of his great nobles; they owe theirs to their barons and
landholding knights; they owe theirs to their people. There are
limits beyond which none of them can go; after that, their vassals
turn on them."

"Well, suppose the people of some barony rebel? Won't the king send
troops to support the baron?"

"What troops? Outside a personal guard and enough men to police the
royal city and hold the crown lands, the king has no troops. If he
wants troops, he has to get them from his great nobles; they have to
get them from their vassal barons, who raise them by calling out
their people." That was another source of dissatisfaction with King
Angus of Gram; he had been augmenting his forces by hiring
off-planet mercenaries. "And the people won't help some other baron
oppress his people; it might be their turn next."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You mean, the people are armed?" Prince Bentrik was incredulous.

"Great Satan, aren't yours?" Prince Trask was equally surprised.
"Then your democracy's a farce, and the people are only free on
sufferance. If their ballots aren't secured by arms, they're
worthless. Who has the arms on your planet?"

"Why, the Government."

"You mean the King?"

Prince Bentrik was shocked. Certainly not; horrid idea. That would
be ... why, it would be _despotism_! Besides, the King wasn't the
Government, at all; the Government ruled in the King's name. There
was the Assembly; the Chamber of Representatives, and the Chamber of
Delegates. The people elected the Representatives, and the
Representatives elected the Delegates, and the Delegates elected the
Chancellor. Then, there was the Prime Minister; he was appointed by
the King, but the King had to appoint him from the party holding the
most seats in the Chamber of Representatives, and he appointed the
Ministers, who handled the executive work of the Government, only
their subordinates in the different Ministries were career-officials
who were selected by competitive examination for the bottom jobs and
promoted up the bureaucratic ladder from there.

This left Trask wondering if the Mardukan constitution hadn't been
devised by Goldberg, the legendary Old Terran inventor who always
did everything the hard way. It also left him wondering just how in
Gehenna the Government of Marduk ever got anything done.

Maybe it didn't. Maybe that was what saved Marduk from having a real
despotism.

"Well, what prevents the Government from enslaving the people?
The people can't; you just told me that they aren't armed, and
the Government is."

He continued, pausing now and then for breath, to catalogue every
tyranny he had ever heard of, from those practiced by the Terran
Federation before the Big War to those practiced at Eglonsby on
Amaterasu by Pedrosan Pedro. A few of the very mildest were pushing
the nobles and people of Gram to revolt against Angus I.

"And in the end," he finished, "the Government would be the only
property owner and the only employer on the planet, and everybody
else would be slaves, working at assigned tasks, wearing
Government-issued clothing and eating Government food, their
children educated as the Government prescribes and trained for jobs
selected for them by the Government, never reading a book or seeing
a play or thinking a thought that the Government had not
approved...."

Most of the Mardukans were laughing, now. Some of them were accusing
him of being just too utterly ridiculous.

"Why, the people _are_ the Government. The people would not
legislate themselves into slavery."

He wished Otto Harkaman were there. All he knew of history was the
little he had gotten from reading some of Harkaman's books, and the
long, rambling conversations aboard ship in hyperspace or in the
evenings at Rivington. But Harkaman, he was sure, could have
furnished hundreds of instances, on scores of planets and over ten
centuries of time, in which people had done exactly that and hadn't
known what they were doing, even after it was too late.

       *       *       *       *       *

"They have something about like that on Aton," one of the Mardukan
officers said.

"Oh, Aton; that's a dictatorship, pure and simple. That Planetary
Nationalist gang got into control fifty years ago, during the crisis
after the war with Baldur...."

"They were voted into power by the people, weren't they?"

"Yes; they were," Prince Bentrik said gravely. "It was an emergency
measure, and they were given emergency powers. Once they were in,
they made the emergency permanent."

"That couldn't happen on Marduk!" a young nobleman declared.

"It could if Zaspar Makann's party wins control of the Assembly at
the next election," somebody else said.

"Oh, then Marduk's safe! The sun'll go nova first," one of the
junior Royal Navy officers said.

After that, they began talking about women, a subject any spaceman
will drop any other subject to discuss.

Trask made a mental note of the name of Zaspar Makann, and took
occasion to bring it up in conversation with his shipboard guests.
Every time he talked about Makann to two or more Mardukans, he heard
at least three or more opinions about the man. He was a political
demagogue; on that everybody agreed. After that, opinions diverged.

Makann was a raving lunatic, and all the followers he had were a
handful of lunatics like him. He might be a lunatic, but he had a
dangerously large following. Well, not so large; maybe they'd pick
up a seat or so in the Assembly, but that was doubtful--not enough
of them in any representative district to elect an Assemblyman. He
was just a smart crook, milking a lot of half-witted plebeians for
all he could get out of them. Not just plebes, either; a lot of
industrialists were secretly financing him, in hope that he would
help them break up the labor unions. You're nuts; everybody knew the
labor unions were backing him, hoping he'd scare the employers into
granting concessions. You're both nuts; he was backed by the
mercantile interests; they were hoping he'd run the Gilgameshers
off the planet.

Well, that was one thing you had to give him credit for. He wanted
to run out the Gilgameshers. Everybody was in favor of that.

Now, Trask could remember something he'd gotten from Harkaman.
There had been Hitler, back at the end of the First Century
Pre-Atomic; hadn't he gotten into power because everybody was
in favor of running out the Christians, or the Moslems, or the
Albigensians, or somebody?




XX


Marduk had three moons; a big one, fifteen hundred miles in
diameter, and two insignificant twenty-mile chunks of rock. The big
one was fortified, and a couple of ships were in orbit around it.
The _Nemesis_ was challenged as she emerged from her last hyperjump;
both ships broke orbit and came out to meet her, and several more
were detected lifting away from the planet.

Prince Bentrik took the communication screen, and immediately
encountered difficulties. The commandant, even after the situation
had been explained twice to him, couldn't understand. A Royal Navy
fleet unit knocked out in a battle with Space Vikings was bad
enough, but being rescued and brought to Marduk by another Space
Viking simply didn't make sense. He then screened the Royal Palace
at Malverton, on the planet; first he was icily polite to somebody
several echelons below him in the peerage, and then respectfully
polite to somebody he addressed as Prince Vandarvant. Finally, after
some minutes' wait, a frail, white-haired man in a little black
cap-of-maintenance appeared in the screen. Prince Bentrik instantly
sprang to his feet. So did all the other Mardukans in the command
room.

"Your Majesty! I am most deeply honored!"

"Are you all right, Simon?" the old gentleman asked solicitously.
"They haven't done anything to you, have they?"

"Saved my life, and my men's, and treated me like a friend and
a comrade, Your Majesty. Have I your permission to present,
informally, their commander, Prince Trask of Tanith?"

"Indeed you may, Simon. I owe the gentleman my deepest thanks."

"His Majesty, Mikhyl the Eighth, Planetary King of Marduk," Prince
Bentrik said. "His Highness, Lucas, Prince Trask, Planetary Viceroy
of Tanith for his Majesty Angus the First of Gram."

The elderly monarch bowed his head slightly; Trask bowed a little
more deeply, from the waist.

"I am very happy, Prince Trask, first, I confess, at the safe return
of my kinsman Prince Bentrik, and then at the honor of meeting one
in the confidence of my fellow sovereign King Angus of Gram. I will
never be ungrateful for what you did for my cousin and for his
officers and men. You must stay at the Palace while you are on this
planet; I am giving orders for your reception, and I wish you to be
formally presented to me this evening." He hesitated briefly. "Gram;
that is one of the Sword-Worlds, is it not?" Another brief
hesitation. "Are you really a Space Viking, Prince Trask?"

Maybe he'd expected Space Vikings to have three horns and a spiked
tail and stand twelve feet tall, himself.

It took several hours for the _Nemesis_ to get into orbit. Bentrik
spent most of them in a screen-booth, and emerged visibly relieved.

"Nobody's going to be sticky about what happened on Audhumla," he
told Trask. "There will be a Board of Inquiry. I'm afraid I had to
mix you up in that. It's not only about the action on Audhumla;
everybody from the Space Minister down wants to hear what you know
about this fellow Dunnan. Like yourself, we all hope he went to
Em-See-Square along with his flagship, but we can't take it for
granted. We have over a dozen trade-planets to protect, and he's
hit more than half of them already."

The process of getting into orbit took them around the planet
several times, and it was a more impressive spectacle at each
circuit. Of course, Marduk had a population of almost two billion,
and had been civilized, with no hiatus of Neobarbarism, since it
had first been colonized in the Fourth Century. Even so, the Space
Vikings were amazed--and stubbornly refusing to show it--at what
they saw in the telescopic screens.

"Look at that city!" Paytrik Morland whispered. "We talk about the
civilized planets, but I never realized they were anything like
this. Why, this makes Excalibur look like Tanith!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The city was Malverton, the capital; like any city of a
contragravity-using people, it lay in a rough circle of buildings
towering out of green interspaces, surrounded by the smaller circles
of spaceports and industrial suburbs. The difference was that any of
these were as large as Camelot on Excalibur or four Wardshavens on
Gram, and Malverton itself was almost half the size of the whole
barony of Traskon.

"They aren't any more civilized that we are, Paytrik. There are just
more of them. If there were two billion people on Gram--which I hope
there never will be--Gram would have cities like this, too."

One thing; the government of a planet like Marduk would have to
be something more elaborate than the loose feudalism of the
Sword-Worlds. Maybe this Goldberg-ocracy of theirs had been forced
upon them by the sheer complexity of the population and its
problems.

Alvyn Karffard took a quick look around him to make sure none
of the Mardukans were in earshot.

"I don't care how many people they have," he said. "Marduk can be
had. A wolf never cares how many sheep there are in a flock. With
twenty ships, we could take this planet like we took Eglonsby.
There'd be losses coming in, sure, but after we were in and down,
we'd have it."

"Where would we get twenty ships?"

Tanith, at a pinch, could muster five or six, counting the free
Space Vikings who used the base facilities; they would have to leave
a couple to hold the planet. Beowulf had one, and another almost
completed, and now there was an Amaterasu ship. But to assemble a
Space Viking armada of twenty.... He shook his head. The real reason
why Space Vikings had never raided a civilized planet successfully
had always been their inability to combine under one command in
sufficient strength.

Besides, he didn't want to raid Marduk. A raid, if successful, would
yield immense treasures, but cause a hundred, even a thousand, times
as much destruction, and he didn't want to destroy anything
civilized.

The landing stages of the palace were crowded when he and Prince
Bentrik landed, and, at a discreet distance, swarms of air-vehicles
circled, creating a control problem for the police. Parting from
Bentrik, he was escorted to the suite prepared for him; it was
luxurious in the extreme but scarcely above Sword-World standards.
There were a surprising number of human servants, groveling and
fawning and getting underfoot and doing work robots could have been
doing better. What robots there were were inefficient, and much work
and ingenuity had been lavished on efforts to copy human form to the
detriment of function.

After getting rid of most of the superfluous servants, he put on a
screen and began sampling the newscasts. There were telescopic views
of the _Nemesis_ from some craft on orbit nearby, and he watched the
officers and men of the _Victrix_ being disembarked; there were
other views of their landing at some naval installation on the
ground, and he could see reporters being chevied away by Navy
ground-police. And there was a wide range of commentary opinion.

The Government had already denied that, (1) Prince Bentrik had
captured the _Nemesis_ and brought her in as a prize, and, (2) the
Space Vikings had captured Prince Bentrik and were holding him for
ransom. Beyond that, the Government was trying to sit on the whole
story, and the Opposition was hinting darkly at corrupt deals and
sinister plots. Prince Bentrik arrived in the midst of an
impassioned tirade against pusillanimous traitors surrounding his
Majesty who were betraying Marduk to the Space Vikings.

"Why doesn't your Government publish the facts and put a stop to
that nonsense?" Trask asked.

"Oh, let them rave," Bentrik replied. "The longer the Government
waits, the more they'll be ridiculed when the facts are published."

Or, the more people will be convinced that the Government had
something to hush up, and had to take time to construct a plausible
story. He kept the thought to himself. It was their government; how
they mismanaged it was their own business. He found that there was
no bartending robot; he had to have a human servant bring drinks. He
made up his mind to have a few of the _Nemesis_ robots sent down to him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The formal presentation would be in the evening; there would be a
dinner first, and because Trask had not yet been formally presented,
he couldn't dine with the King, but because he was, or claimed to
be, Viceroy of Tanith, he ranked as a chief of state and would dine
with the Crown Prince, to whom there would be an informal
introduction first.

This took place in a small ante-chamber off the banquet hall; the
Crown Prince and Crown Princess and Princess Bentrik were there when
they arrived. The Crown Prince was a man of middle age, graying at
the temples, with the glassy stare that betrayed contact lenses. The
resemblance between him and his father was apparent; both had the
same studious and impractical expression, and might have been
professors on the same university faculty. He shook hands with
Trask, assuring him of the gratitude of the Court and Royal Family.

"You know, Simon is next in succession, after myself and my little
daughter," he said. "That's too close to take chances with him." He
turned to Bentrik. "I'm afraid this is your last space adventure,
Simon. You'll have to be a spaceport spaceman from now on."

"I shan't be sorry," Princess Bentrik said. "And if anybody owes
Prince Trask gratitude, I do." She pressed his hands warmly. "Prince
Trask, my son wants to meet you, very badly. He's ten years old, and
he thinks Space Vikings are romantic heroes."

"He should be one, for a while."

He should just see a planet Space Vikings had raided.

Most of the people at the upper end of the table were
diplomats--ambassadors from Odin and Baldur and Isis and Ishtar and
Aton and the other civilized worlds. No doubt they hadn't actually
expected horns and a spiked tail, or even tattooing and a nose ring,
but after all, Space Vikings were just some sort of Neobarbarians,
weren't they? On the other hand, they had all seen views and gotten
descriptions of the _Nemesis_, and had heard about the ship-action
on Audhumla, and this Prince Trask--a Space Viking prince; that
sounded civilized enough--had saved a life with only three other
lives, one almost at an end, between it and the throne. And they had
heard about the screen conversation with King Mikhyl. So they were
courteous through the meal, and tried to get as close as possible to
him in the procession to the throne room.

King Mikhyl wore a golden crown topped by the planetary emblem,
which must have weighed twice as much as a combat helmet, and
fur-edged robes that would weigh more than a suit of space armor.
They weren't nearly as ornate, though, as the regalia of King Angus
I of Gram. He rose to clasp Prince Bentrik's hand, calling him "dear
cousin," and congratulating him on his gallant fight and fortunate
escape. That knocks any court-martial talk on the head, Trask
thought. He remained standing to shake hands with Trask, calling him
"valued friend to me and my house." First person singular; that must
be causing some lifted eyebrows.

Then the King sat down, and the rest of the roomful filed up onto
the dais to be received, and finally it was over and the king rose
and proceeded, followed by his immediate suite between the bowing
and curtsying court and out the wide doors. After a decent interval,
Crown Prince Edvard escorted him and Prince Bentrik down the same
route, the others falling in behind, and across the hall to the
ballroom, where there was soft music and refreshments. It wasn't too
unlike a court reception on Excalibur, except that the drinks and
canapes were being dispensed by human servants.

He was wondering what sort of court functions Angus the First of
Gram was holding by now.

After half an hour, a posse of court functionaries approached and
informed him that it had pleased his Majesty to command Prince Trask
to attend him in his private chambers. There was an audible gasp at
this; both Prince Bentrik and the Crown Prince were trying not to
grin too broadly. Evidently this didn't happen too often. He followed
the functionaries from the ballroom, and the eyes of everybody else
followed him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Old King Mikhyl received him alone, in a small, comfortably shabby
room behind vast ones of incredible splendor. He wore fur-lined
slippers and a loose robe with a fur collar, and his little black
cap-of-maintenance. He was standing when Trask entered; when the
guards closed the door and left them alone, he beckoned Trask to
a couple of chairs, with a low table, on which were decanters and
glasses and cigars, between.

"It's a presumption on royal authority to summon you from the
ballroom," he began, after they had seated themselves and filled
glasses. "You are quite the cynosure, you know."

"I'm grateful to Your Majesty. It's both comfortable and quiet here,
and I can sit down. Your Majesty was the center of attention in the
throne room, yet I seemed to detect a look of relief as you left it."

"I try to hide it, as much as possible." The old King took off the
little gold-circled cap and hung it on the back of his chair.
"Majesty can be rather wearying, you know."

So he could come here and put it off. Trask felt that some gesture
should be made on his own part. He unfastened the dress-dagger from
his belt and laid it on the table. The King nodded.

"Now, we can be a couple of honest tradesmen, our shops closed for
the evening, relaxing over our wine and tobacco," he said. "Eh,
Goodman Lucas?"

It seemed like an initiation into a secret society whose ritual he
must guess at step by step.

"Right, Goodman Mikhyl."

They lifted their glasses to each other and drank; Goodman Mikhyl
offered cigars, and Goodman Lucas held a light for him.

"I hear a few hard things about your trade, Goodman Lucas."

"All true, and mostly understated. We're professional murderers and
robbers, as one of my fellow tradesmen says. The worst of it is that
robbery and murder become just that: a trade, like servicing robots
or selling groceries."

"Yet you fought two other Space Vikings to cover my cousin's
crippled _Victrix_. Why?"

So he must tell his tale, so worn and smooth, again. King Mikhyl's
cigar went out while he listened.

"And you have been hunting him ever since? And now, you can't be
sure whether you killed him or not?"

"I'm afraid I didn't. The man in the screen is the only man Dunnan
can really trust. One or the other would stay wherever he has his
base all the time."

"And when you do kill him; what then?"

"I'll go on trying to make a civilized planet of Tanith. Sooner or
later, I'll have one quarrel too many with King Angus, and then we
will be our Majesty Lucas the First of Tanith, and we will sit on a
throne and receive our subjects. And I'll be glad when I can get my
crown off and talk to a few men who call me 'shipmate,' instead of
'Your Majesty.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

"Well, it would violate professional ethics for me to advise a
subject to renounce his sovereign, of course, but that might be an
excellent thing. You met the ambassador from Ithavoll at dinner, did
you not? Three centuries ago, Ithavoll was a colony of Marduk--it
seems we can't afford colonies, any more--and it seceded from us.
Ithavoll was then a planet like your Tanith seems to be. Today, it
is a civilized world, and one of Marduk's best friends. You know,
sometimes I think a few lights are coming on again, here and there
in the Old Federation. If so, you Space Vikings are helping to light
them."

"You mean the planets we use as bases, and the things we teach the
locals?"

"That, too, of course. Civilization needs civilized technologies.
But they have to be used for civilized ends. Do you know anything
about a Space Viking raid on Aton, over a century ago?"

"Six ships from Haulteclere; four destroyed, the other two returned
damaged and without booty."

The King of Marduk nodded.

"That raid saved civilization on Aton. There were four great
nations; the two greatest were at the brink of war, and the others
were waiting to pounce on the exhausted victor and then fight each
other for the spoils. The Space Vikings forced them to unite. Out of
that temporary alliance came the League for Common Defense, and from
that the Planetary Republic. The Republic's a dictatorship, now, and
just between Goodman Mikhyl and Goodman Lucas it's a nasty one and
our Majesty's Government doesn't like it at all. It will be smashed
sooner or later, but they'll never go back to divided sovereignty
and nationalism again. The Space Vikings frightened them out of that
when the dangers inherent in it couldn't. Maybe this man Dunnan will
do the same for us on Marduk."

"You have troubles?"

"You've seen decivilized planets. How does it happen?"

"I know how it's happened on a good many: War. Destruction of cities
and industries. Survivors among ruins, too busy keeping their own
bodies alive to try to keep civilization alive. Then they lose all
knowledge of how to be civilized."

"That's catastrophic decivilization. There is also decivilization by
erosion, and while it's going on, nobody notices it. Everybody is
proud of their civilization, their wealth and culture. But trade is
falling off; fewer ships come in each year. So there is boastful
talk about planetary self-sufficiency; who needs off-planet trade
anyhow? Everybody seems to have money, but the government is always
broke. Deficit spending--and always the vital social services for
which the government has to spend money. The most vital one, of
course, is buying votes to keep the government in power. And it gets
harder for the government to get anything done.

"The soldiers are sloppier at drill, and their uniforms and weapons
aren't taken care of. The noncoms are insolent. And more and more
parts of the city are dangerous at night, and then even in the
daytime. And it's been years since a new building went up, and the
old ones aren't being repaired any more."

Trask closed his eyes. Again, he could feel the mellow sun of Gram
on his back, and hear the laughing voices on the lower terrace, and
he was talking to Lothar Ffayle and Rovard Grauffis and Alex Gorram
and Cousin Nikkolay and Otto Harkaman. He said:

"And finally, nobody bothers fixing anything up. And the
power-reactors stop, and nobody seems to be able to get them started
again. It hasn't quite gotten that far on the Sword-Worlds yet."

"It hasn't here, either. Yet." Goodman Mikhyl slipped away; King
Mikhyl VIII looked across the low table at his guest. "Prince Trask,
have you heard of a man named Zaspar Makann?"

"Occasionally. Nothing good about him."

"He is the most dangerous man on this planet," the King said. "And I
can make nobody believe it. Not even my son."




XXI


Prince Bentrik's ten-year-old son, Count Steven of Ravary, wore the
uniform of an ensign of the Royal Navy; he was accompanied by his
tutor, an elderly Navy captain. They both stopped in the doorway
of Trask's suite, and the boy saluted smartly.

"Permission to come aboard, sir?" he asked.

"Welcome aboard, count; captain. Belay the ceremony and find seats;
you're just in time for second breakfast."

As they sat down, he aimed his ultraviolet light-pencil at a serving
robot. Unlike Mardukan robots, which looked like surrealist
conceptions of Pre-Atomic armored knights, it was a smooth ovoid
floating a few inches from the floor on its own contragravity; as it
approached, its top opened like a bursting beetle shell and hinged
trays of food swung out. The boy looked at it in fascination.

"Is that a Sword-World robot, sir, or did you capture it somewhere?"

"It's one of our own." He was pardonably proud; it had been built on
Tanith a year before. "Has an ultrasonic dishwasher underneath, and
it does some cooking on top, at the back."

The elderly captain was, if anything, even more impressed than his
young charge. He knew what went into it, and he had some conception
of the society that would develop things like that.

"I take it you don't use many human servants, with robots like
that," he said.

"Not many. We're all low-population planets, and nobody wants to
be a servant."

"We have too many people on Marduk, and all of them want soft jobs
as nobles' servants," the captain said. "Those that want any kind
of jobs."

"You need all your people for fighting men, don't you?" the boy
count asked.

"Well, we need a good many. The smallest of our ships will carry
five hundred men; most of them around eight hundred."

The captain lifted an eyebrow. The complement of the _Victrix_ had
been three hundred, and she'd been a big ship. Then he nodded.

"Of course. Most of them are ground-fighters."

That started Count Steven off. Questions, about battles and raids
and booty and the planets Trask had seen.

"I wish I were a Space Viking!"

"Well, you can't be, Count Ravary. You're an officer of the Royal
Navy. You're supposed to fight Space Vikings."

"I won't fight you."

"You'd have to, if the King commanded," the old captain told him.

"No. Prince Trask is my friend. He saved my father's life."

"And I won't fight you, either, count. We'll make a lot of
fireworks, and then we'll each go home and claim victory. How would
that be?"

"I've heard of things like that," the captain said. "We had a war
with Odin, seventy years ago, that was mostly that sort of battles."

"Besides, the King is Prince Trask's friend, too," the boy insisted.
"Father and Mummy heard him say so, right on the Throne. Kings don't
lie when they're on the Throne, do they?"

"Good Kings don't," Trask told him.

"Ours is a good King," the young Count of Ravary declared proudly.
"I would do anything my King commanded. Except fight Prince Trask.
My house owes Prince Trask a debt."

Trask nodded approvingly. "That's the way a Sword-World noble would
talk, Count Steven," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Board of Inquiry, that afternoon, was more like a small and very
sedate cocktail party. An Admiral Shefter, who seemed to be very
high high-brass, presided while carefully avoiding the appearance
of doing so. Alvyn Karffard and Vann Larch and Paytrik Morland were
there from the _Nemesis_, and Bentrik and several of the officers
from the _Victrix_, and there were a couple of Naval Intelligence
officers, and somebody from Operational Planning, and from Ship
Construction and Research & Development. They chatted pleasantly
and in a deceptively random manner for a while. Then Shefter said:

"Well, there's no blame or censure of any sort for the way Commodore
Prince Bentrik was surprised. That couldn't have been avoided, at
the time." He looked at the Research & Development officer. "It
shouldn't be allowed to happen many more times, though."

"Not many more, sir. I'd say it'll take my people a month, and then
the time it'll take to get all the ships equipped as they come in."

Ship Construction didn't think that would take too long.

"We'll see to it that you get full information on the new submarine
detection system, Prince Trask," the admiral said.

"You gentlemen understand you'll have to keep it under your helmets,
though," one of the Intelligence men added. "If it got out that we
were informing Space Vikings about our technical secrets...." He
felt the back of his neck in a way that made Trask suspect that
beheadment was the customary form of execution on Marduk.

"We'll have to find out where the fellow has his base," Operational
Planning said. "I take it, Prince Trask, that you're not going to
assume that he was on his flagship when you blew it, and just put
paid to him and forget him?"

"Oh, no. I'm assuming that he wasn't. I don't believe he and Ormm
went anywhere on the same ship, after he came out here and
established a base. I think one of them would stay home all the
time."

"Well, we'll give you everything we have on them," Shefter promised.
"Most of that is classified and you'll have to keep quiet about it,
too. I just skimmed over the summary of what you gave us; I daresay
we'll both get a lot of new information. Have you any idea at all
where he might be based, Prince Trask?"

"Only that we think it's a non-Terra-type planet." He told them
about Dunnan's heavy purchases of air-and-water recycling equipment
and carniculture and hydroponic material. "That, of course, helps a
great deal."

"Yes; there are only about five million planets in the former
Federation space-volume that are inhabitable in artificial
environment. Including a few completely covered by seas, where you
could put in underwater dome cities if you had the time and
material."

One of the Intelligence officers had been nursing a glass with a
tiny remnant of cocktail in it. He downed it suddenly, filled the
glass again, and glowered at it in silence for a while. Then he
drank it briskly and refilled it.

"What I should like to know," he said, "is how this double obscenity
of a Dunnan knew we'd have a ship on Audhumla just when we did," he
said. "Your talking about underwater dome-cities reminded me of it.
I don't think he just pulled that planet out of a hat and then went
there prepared to sit on the bottom of the ocean for a year and a
half waiting for something to turn up. I think he knew the
_Victrix_ was coming to Audhumla, and just about when."

"I don't like that, commodore," Shefter said.

"You think I do, sir?" the Intelligence officer countered. "There it
is, though. We all have to face it."

"We do," Shefter agreed. "Get on it, commodore, and I don't need to
caution you to screen everybody you put onto it very carefully." He
looked at his own glass; it had a bare thimbleful in the bottom. He
replenished it slowly and carefully. "It's been a long time since
the Navy's had anything like this to worry about." He turned to
Trask. "I suppose I can get in touch with you at the Palace whenever
I must?"

"Well, Prince Trask and I have been invited as house-guests at
Prince Edvard's, I mean Baron Cragdale's, hunting lodge," Bentrik
said. "We'll be going there directly from here."

"Ah." Admiral Shefter smiled slightly. Beside not having three horns
and a spiked tail, this Space Viking was definitely _persona grata_
with the Royal Family. "Well, we'll keep in contact, Prince Trask."

       *       *       *       *       *

The hunting lodge where Crown Prince Edvard was simple Baron
Cragdale lay at the head of a sharply-sloping mountain valley down
which a river tumbled. Mountains rose on either side in high scarps,
some topped with perpetual snow, glaciers curling down from them.
The lower ranges were forested, as was the valley between, and there
was a red-mauve alpenglow on the great peak that rose from the head
of the valley. For the first time in over a year, Elaine was with
him, silently clinging to him to see the beauty of it through his
eyes. He had thought that she had gone from him forever.

The hunting lodge itself was not quite what a Sword-Worlder would
expect a hunting lodge to be. At first sight, from the air, it
looked like a sundial, a slender tower rising like a gnomen above a
circle of low buildings and formal gardens. The boat landed at the
foot of it, and he and Prince and Princess Bentrik and the young
Count of Ravary and his tutor descended. Immediately, they were
beset by a flurry of servants; the second boat, with the Bentrik
servants and their luggage, was circling in to land. Elaine, he
discovered, wasn't with him any more, and then he was separated from
the Bentriks and was being floated up an inside shaft in a
lifter-car. More servants installed him in his rooms, unpacked his
cases, drew his bath and even tried to help him take it, and fussed
over him while he dressed.

There were over a score for dinner. Bentrik had warned him that he'd
find some odd types; maybe he meant that they wouldn't all be
nobles. Among the commoners there were some professors, mostly
social sciences, a labor leader, a couple of Representatives and a
member of the Chamber of Delegates, and a couple of social workers,
whatever that meant.

His own table companion was a Lady Valerie Alvarath. She was
beautiful--black hair, and almost startlingly blue eyes, a
combination unusual in the Sword-Worlds--and she was intelligent,
or at least cleverly articulate. She was introduced as the
lady-companion of the Crown Prince's daughter. When he asked
where the daughter was, she laughed.

"She won't be helping entertain visiting Space Vikings for a long
time, Prince Trask. She is precisely eight years old; I saw her
getting ready for bed before I came down here. I'll look in on her
after dinner."

Then the Crown Princess Melanie, on his other hand, asked him some
question about Sword-World court etiquette. He stuck to
generalities, and what he could remember from a presentation at the
court of Excalibur during his student days. These people had a
monarchy since before Gram had been colonized; he wasn't going to
admit that Gram's had been established since he went off-planet.
The table was small enough for everybody to hear what he was saying
and to feed questions to him. It lasted all through the meal, and
continued when they adjourned for coffee in the library.

"But what about your form of government, your social structure,
that sort of thing?" somebody, impatient with the artificialities
of the court, wanted to know.

"Well, we don't use the word government very much," he replied. "We
talk a lot about authority and sovereignty, and I'm afraid we burn
entirely too much powder over it, but government always seems to us
like sovereignty interfering in matters that don't concern it. As
long as sovereignty maintains a reasonable semblance of good public
order and makes the more serious forms of crime fairly hazardous for
the criminals, we're satisfied."

"But that's just negative. Doesn't the government do anything
positive for the people?"

He tried to explain the Sword-World feudal system to them. It was
hard, he found, to explain something you have taken for granted all
your life to somebody who is quite unfamiliar with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But the government--the sovereignty, since you don't like the other
word--doesn't do anything for the people!" one of the professors
objected. "It leaves all the social services to the whim of the
individual lord or baron."

"And the people have no voice at all; why, that's tyranny,"
a professor Assemblyman added.

He tried to explain that the people had a very distinct and
commanding voice, and that barons and lords who wanted to stay
alive listened attentively to it. The Assemblyman changed his mind;
that wasn't tyranny, it was anarchy. And the professor was still
insistent about who performed the social services.

"If you mean schools and hospitals and keeping the city clean, the
people do that for themselves. The government, if you want to think
of it as that, just sees to it that nobody's shooting at them while
they're doing it."

"That isn't what Professor Pullwell means, Lucas. He means old-age
pensions," Prince Bentrik said. "Like this thing Zaspar Makann's
whooping for."

He'd heard about that, on the voyage from Audhumla. Every person on
Marduk would be retired on an adequate pension after thirty years
regular employment or at the age of sixty. When he had wanted to
know where the money would come from, he had been told that there
would be a sales tax, and that the pensions must all be spent within
thirty days, which would stimulate business, and the increased
business would provide tax money to pay the pensions.

"We have a joke about three Gilgameshers space-wrecked on an
uninhabited planet," he said. "Ten years later, when they were
rescued, all three were immensely wealthy, from trading hats with
each other. That's about the way this thing will work."

One of the lady social workers bristled; it wasn't right to make
derogatory jokes about racial groups. One of the professors
harrumphed; wasn't a parallel at all, the Self-Sustaining Rotary
Pension Plan was perfectly feasible. With a shock, Trask recalled
that he was a professor of economics.

Alvyn Karffard wouldn't need any twenty ships to loot Marduk. Just
infiltrate it with about a hundred smart confidence men and inside
a year they'd own everything on it.

That started them all off on Zaspar Makann, though. Some of them
thought he had a few good ideas, but was damaging his own case by
extremism. One of the wealthier nobles said that he was a reproach
to the ruling class; it was their fault that people like Makann
could gain a following. One old gentleman said that maybe the
Gilgameshers were to blame, themselves, for some of the animosity
toward them. He was immediately set upon by all the others and
verbally torn to pieces on the spot.

Trask didn't feel it proper to quote Goodman Mikhyl to this crowd.
He took the responsibility upon himself for saying:

"From what I've heard of him, I think he's the most serious threat
to civilized society on Marduk."

They didn't call him crazy, after all he was a guest, but they
didn't ask him what he meant, either. They merely told him that
Makann was a crackpot with a contemptible following of half-wits,
and just wait till the election and see what happened.

"I'm inclined to agree with Prince Trask," Bentrik said soberly.
"And I'm afraid the election results will be a shock to us, not to
Makann."

He hadn't talked that way on the ship. Maybe he'd been looking
around and doing some thinking, since he got back. He might have
been talking to Goodman Mikhyl, too. There was a screen in the room.
He nodded toward it.

"He's speaking at a rally of the People's Welfare Party at Drepplin,
now," he said. "May I put it on, to show you what I mean?"

When the Crown Prince assented, he snapped on the screen and
twiddled at the selector.

       *       *       *       *       *

A face looked out of it. The features weren't Andray Dunnan's--the
mouth was wider, the cheekbones broader, the chin more rounded. But
his eyes were Dunnan's, as Trask had seen them on the terrace of
Karvall House. Mad eyes. His high-pitched voice screamed:

"Our beloved sovereign is a prisoner! He is surrounded by traitors!
The Ministries are full of them! They are all traitors! The
bloodthirsty reactionaries of the falsely so-called Crown Loyalist
Party! The grasping conspiracy of the interstellar bankers! The
dirty Gilgameshers! They are all leagued together in an unholy
conspiracy! And now this Space Viking, this bloody-handed monster
from the Sword-Worlds...."

"Shut the horrible man off," somebody was yelling, in competition
with the hypnotic scream of the speaker.

The trouble was, they couldn't. They could turn off the screen, but
Zaspar Makann would go on screaming, and millions all over the
planet would still hear him. Bentrik twiddled the selector. The
voice stuttered briefly, and then came echoing out of the speaker,
but this time the pickup was somewhere several hundred feet above
a great open park. It was densely packed with people, most of them
wearing clothes a farm tramp on Gram wouldn't be found dead in,
but here and there among them were blocks of men in what was
almost but not quite military uniform, each with a short and thick
swagger-stick with a knobbed head. Across the park, in the distance,
the head and shoulders of Zaspar Makann loomed a hundred feet high
in a huge screen. Whenever he stopped for breath, a shout would go
up, beginning with the blocks of uniformed men:

"_Makann! Makann! Makann the Leader! Makann to Power!_"

"You even let him have a private army?" he asked the Crown Prince.

"Oh, those silly buffoons and their musical-comedy uniforms,"
the Crown Prince shrugged. "They aren't armed."

"Not visibly," he granted. "Not yet."

"I don't know where they'd get arms."

"No, Your Highness," Prince Bentrik said. "Neither do I.
That's what I'm worried about."




XXII


He succeeded, the next morning, in convincing everybody that he
wanted to be alone for a while, and was sitting in a garden,
watching the rainbows in the midst of a big waterfall across the
valley. Elaine would have liked that, but she wasn't with him, now.

Then he realized that somebody was speaking to him, in a small,
bashful voice. He turned, and saw a little girl in shorts and a
sleeveless jacket, holding in her arms a long-haired blond puppy
with big ears and appealing eyes.

"Hello, both of you," he said.

The puppy wriggled and tried to lick the girl's face.

"Don't, Mopsy. We want to talk to this gentleman," she said.
"Are you really and truly the Space Viking?"

"Really and truly. And who are you two?"

"I'm Myrna. And this is Mopsy."

"Hello, Myrna. Hello, Mopsy."

Hearing his name, the puppy wriggled again and dropped from the
child's arms; after a brief hesitation, he came over and jumped onto
Trask's lap, licking his face. While he petted the dog, the girl
came over and sat on the bench beside him.

[Illustration]

"Mopsy likes you," she said. After a moment, she added: "I like you, too."

"And I like you," he said. "Would you want to be my girl? You know,
a Space Viking has to have a girl on every planet. How would you
like to be my girl on Marduk?"

Myrna thought that over carefully. "I'd like to, but I couldn't.
You see, I'm going to have to be Queen, some day."

"Oh?"

"Yes. Grandpa is King now, and when he's through being King, Pappa
will have to be King, and then when he's through being King, I can't
be King because I'm a girl, so I'll have to be Queen. And I can't be
anybody's girl, because I'm going to have to marry somebody I don't
know, for reasons of state." She thought some more, and lowered her
voice. "I'll tell you a secret. I am a Queen now."

"Oh, you are?"

She nodded. "We are Queen, in our own right, of our Royal Bedroom,
our Royal Playroom, and our Royal Bathroom. And Mopsy is our
faithful subject."

"Is Your Majesty absolute ruler of these domains?"

"No," she said disgustedly. "We must at all times defer to our Royal
Ministers, just like Grandpa has to. That means, I have to do just
what they tell me to. That's Lady Valerie, and Margot, and Dame Eunice,
and Sir Thomas. But Grandpa says they are good and wise ministers.
Are you really a Prince? I didn't know Space Vikings were Princes."

"Well, my King says I am. And I am ruler of my planet, and I'll tell
you a secret. I don't have to do what anybody tells me."

"Gee! Are you a tyrant? You're awfully big and strong. I'll bet
you've slain just hundreds of cruel and wicked enemies."

"Thousands, Your Majesty."

He wished that weren't literally true; he didn't know how many of
them had been little girls like Myrna and little dogs like Mopsy. He
found that he was holding both of them tightly. The girl was saying:
"But you feel bad about it." These children must be telepaths!

"A Space Viking who is also a Prince must do many things he doesn't
want to do."

"I know. So does a Queen. I hope Grandpa and Pappa don't get through
being King for just years and years." She looked over his shoulder.
"Oh! And now I suppose I've got to do something else I don't want to.
Lessons, I bet."

He followed her eyes. The girl who had been his dinner companion was
approaching; she wore a wide sunshade hat, and a gown that trailed
filmy gauze like sunset-colored mist. There was another woman, in
the garb of an upper servant, with her.

"Lady Valerie and who else?" he whispered.

"Margot. She's my nurse. She's awful strict, but she's nice."

"Prince Trask, has Her Highness been bothering you?" Lady Valerie asked.

"Oh, far from it." He rose, still holding the funny little dog.
"But you should say, Her Majesty. She has informed me that she
is sovereign of three princely domains. And of one dear loving
subject." He gave the subject back to the sovereign.

"You should not have told Prince Trask that," Lady Valerie chided.
"When Your Majesty is outside her domains, Your Majesty must remain
incognito. Now, Your Majesty must go with the Minister of the
Bedchamber; the Minister of Education awaits an audience."

"Arithmetic, I bet. Well, good-by, Prince Trask. I hope I can see
you again. Say good-by, Mopsy."

She went away with her nurse, the little dog looking back over her
shoulder.

"I came out to enjoy the gardens alone," he said, "and now I find
I'd rather enjoy them in company. If your Ministerial duties do not
forbid, could you be the company?"

"But gladly, Prince Trask. Her Majesty will be occupied with serious
affairs of state. Square root. Have you seen the grottoes? They're
down this way."

       *       *       *       *       *

That afternoon, one of the gentlemen-attendants caught up with him;
Baron Cragdale would be gratified if Prince Trask could find time to
talk with him privately. Before they had talked more than a few
minutes, however, Baron Cragdale abruptly became Crown Prince Edvard.

"Prince Trask, Admiral Shefter tells me that you and he are having
informal discussions about co-operation against this mutual enemy
of ours, Dunnan. This is fine; it has my approval, and the approval
of Prince Vandarvant, the Prime Minister, and, I might add, that of
Goodman Mikhyl. I think it ought to go further, though. A formal treaty
between Tanith and Marduk would be greatly to the advantage of both."

"I'd be inclined to think so, Prince Edvard. But aren't you
proposing marriage on rather short acquaintance? It's only been
fifty hours since the _Nemesis_ orbited in here."

"Well, we know a bit about you and your planet beforehand. There's
a large Gilgamesher colony here. You have a few on Tanith, haven't
you? Well, anything one Gilgamesher knows, they all find out, and
ours are co-operative with Naval intelligence."

That would be why Andray Dunnan was having no dealings with
Gilgameshers. It would also be what Zaspar Makann meant when
he ranted about the Gilgamesh Interstellar Conspiracy.

"I can see where an arrangement like that would be mutually
advantageous. I'd be quite in favor of it. Co-operation against
Dunnan, of course, and reciprocal trade-rights on each other's
trade-planets, and direct trade between Marduk and Tanith. And
Beowulf and Amaterasu would come into it, too. Does this also have
the approval of the Prime Minister and the King?"

"Goodman Mikhyl's in favor of it; there's a distinction between him
and the King, as you'll have noticed. The King can't be in favor of
anything till the Assembly or the Chancellor express an opinion.
Prince Vandarvant favors it personally; as Prime Minister, he is
reserving his opinion. We'll have to get the support of the Crown
Loyalist Party before he can take an unequivocal position."

"Well, Baron Cragdale; speaking as Baron Trask of Traskon, suppose
we just work out a rough outline of what this treaty ought to be,
and then consult, unofficially, with a few people whom you can
trust, and see what can be done about presenting it to the proper
government officials...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Prime Minister came to Cragdale that evening, heavily incognito
and accompanied by several leaders of the Crown Loyalist Party. In
principle, they all favored a treaty with Tanith. Politically, they
had doubts. Not before the election; too controversial a subject.
"Controversial," it appeared, was the dirtiest dirty-name anything
could be called on Marduk. It would alienate the labor vote; they'd
think increased imports would threaten employment in Mardukan
industries. Some of the interstellar trading companies would like
a chance at the Tanith planets; others would resent Tanith ships
being given access to theirs. And Zaspar Makann's party were already
shrieking protests about the _Nemesis_ being repaired by the
Royal Navy.

And a couple of professors who inclined toward Makann had introduced
a resolution calling for the court-martial of Prince Bentrik and an
investigation of the loyalty of Admiral Shefter. And somebody else,
probably a stooge of Makann's, was claiming that Bentrik had sold
the _Victrix_ to the Space Vikings and that the films of the battle of
Audhumla were fakes, photographed in miniature at the Navy Moon Base.

Admiral Shefter, when Trask flew in to see him the next day, was
contemptuous about this last.

"Ignore the whole bloody thing; we get something like that before
every general election. On this planet, you can always kick the
Gilgameshers and the Armed Forces with impunity, neither have votes
and neither can kick back. The whole thing'll be forgotten the day
after the election. It always is."

"That's if Makann doesn't win the election," Trask qualified.

"That's no matter who wins the election. They can't any of them
get along without the Navy, and they bloody well know it."

Trask wanted to know if Intelligence had been getting anything.

"Not on how Dunnan found out the _Victrix_ had been ordered to
Audhumla, no," Shefter said. "There wasn't any secrecy about it;
at least a thousand people, from myself down to the shoeshine boys,
could have known about it as soon as the order was taped.

"As for the list of ships you gave me, yes. One of them puts in
to this planet regularly; she spaced out from here only yesterday
morning. The _Honest Horris_."

"Well, great Satan, haven't you done anything?"

"I don't know if there's anything we can do. Oh, we're investigating,
but.... You see, this ship first showed up here four years ago,
commanded by some kind of a Neobarb, not a Gilgamesher, named Horris
Sasstroff. He claimed to be from Skathi; the locals there have a few
ships, the Space Vikings had a base on Skathi about a hundred or so
years ago. Naturally, the ship had no papers. Tramp trading among
the Neobarbs, it might be years before you'd put in on a planet where
they'd ever heard of ship's papers.

"The ship seems to have been in bad shape, probably abandoned on
Skathi as junk a century ago and tinkered up by the locals. She was
in here twice, according to the commercial shipping records, and the
second time she was in too bad shape to be moved out, and Sasstroff
couldn't pay to have her rebuilt, so she was libeled for spaceport
charges and sold. Some one-lung trading company bought her and fixed
her up a little; they went bankrupt in a year or so, and she was
bought by another small company, Startraders, Ltd., and they've been
using her on a milk-run to and from Gimli. They seem to be a
legitimate outfit, but we're looking into them. We're looking for
Sasstroff, too, but we haven't been able to find him."

"If you have a ship out Gimli way, you might find out if anybody
there knows anything about her. You may discover that she hasn't
been going there at all."

"We might, at that," Shefter agreed. "We'll just find out."

       *       *       *       *       *

Everybody at Cragdale knew about the projected treaty with Tanith
by the morning after Trask's first conversation with Prince Edvard
on the subject. The Queen of the Royal Bedroom, the Royal Playroom
and the Royal Bathroom was insisting that her domains should have
a treaty with Tanith, too.

It was beginning to look to Trask as though that would be the only
treaty he'd sign on Marduk, and he was having his doubts about that.

"Do you think it would be wise?" he asked Lady Valerie Alvarath.
The Queen of three rooms and one four-footed subject had already
decreed that Lady Valerie should be the Space Viking Prince's girl
on the planet of Marduk. "If it got out, these People's Welfare
lunatics would pick it up and twist it into evidence of some kind
of a sinister plot."

"Oh, I believe Her Majesty could sign a treaty with Prince Trask,"
Her Majesty's Prime Minister decided. "But it would have to be kept
very secret."

"Gee!" Myrna's eyes widened. "A real secret treaty; just like the
wicked rulers of the old dictatorship!" She hugged her subject
ecstatically. "I'll bet Grandpa doesn't even have any secret treaties!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In a few days, everybody on Marduk knew that a treaty with Tanith
was being discussed. If they didn't, it was no fault of Zaspar
Makann's party, who seemed to command a disconcertingly large number
of telecast stations, and who drenched the ether with horror stories
of Space Viking atrocities and denunciations of carefully unnamed
traitors surrounding the King and the Crown Prince who were about to
betray Marduk to rapine and plunder. The leak evidently did not come
from Cragdale, for it was generally believed that Trask was still at
the Royal Palace in Malverton. At least, that was where the
Makannists were demonstrating against him.

He watched such a demonstration by screen; the pickup was evidently
on one of the landing stages of the palace, overlooking the wide
parks surrounding it. They were packed almost solid with people,
surging forward toward the thin cordon of police. The front of the
mob looked like a checkerboard--a block in civilian dress, then a
block in the curiously effeminate-looking uniforms of Zaspar
Makann's People's Watchmen, then more in ordinary garb, and more
People's Watchmen. Over the heads of the crowds, at intervals,
floated small contragravity lifters on which were mounted the
amplifiers that were bellowing:

"SPACE VI-KING--GO HOME! SPACE VI-KING--GO HOME!"

The police stood motionless, at parade rest; the mob surged closer.
When they were fifty yards away, the blocks of People's Watchmen ran
forward, then spread out until they formed a line six deep across
the entire front; other blocks, from the rear, pushed the ordinary
demonstrators aside and took their place. Hating them more every
second, Trask grudged approval of a smart and disciplined maneuver.
How long, he wondered, had they been drilling in that sort of
tactics? Without stopping, they continued their advance on the
police, who had now shifted their stance.

"SPACE VI-KING--GO HOME! SPACE VI-KING--GO HOME!"

"Fire!" he heard himself yelling. "Don't let them get any closer,
fire now!"

They had nothing to fire with; they had only truncheons, no better
weapons than the knobbed swagger-sticks of the People's Watchmen.
They simply disappeared, after a brief flurry of blows, and the
Makann storm-troopers continued their advance.

And that was that. The gates of the Palace were shut; the mob,
behind a front of Makann People's Watchmen, surged up to them and
stopped. The loud-speakers bellowed on, reiterating their four-word
chant.

"Those police were murdered," he said. "They were murdered by the
man who ordered them out there unarmed."

"That would be Count Naydnayr, the Minister of Security," somebody said.

"Then he's the one you want to hang for it."

"What else would you have done?" Crown Prince Edvard challenged.

"Put up about fifty combat cars. Drawn a deadline, and opened
machine-gun fire as soon as the mob crossed it, and kept on firing
till the survivors turned tail and ran. Then sent out more cars, and
shot everybody wearing a People's Watchmen uniform, all over town.
Inside forty-eight hours, there'd be no People's Welfare party, and
no Zaspar Makann either."

The Crown Prince's face stiffened. "That may be the way you do
things in the Sword-Worlds, Prince Trask. It's not the way we do
things here on Marduk. Our government does not propose to be guilty
of shedding the blood of its people."

He had it on the tip of his tongue to retort that if they didn't,
the people would end by shedding theirs. Instead, he said softly:

"I'm sorry, Prince Edvard. You had a wonderful civilization here on
Marduk. You could have made almost anything of it. But it's too late
now. You've torn down the gates; the barbarians are in."

[Illustration][Illustration]




XXIII


The colored turbulence faded into the gray of hyperspace;
five hundred hours to Tanith. Guatt Kirbey was securing his
control-panel, happy to return to his music. And Vann Larch would go
back to his paints and brushes, and Alvyn Karffard to the working
model of whatever it was he had left unfinished when the _Nemesis_
had emerged at the end of the jump from Audhumla.

Trask went to the index of the ship's library and punched for
_History, Old Terran_. There was plenty of that, thanks to Otto
Harkaman. Then he punched for _Hitler, Adolf_. Harkaman was right;
anything that could happen in a human society had already happened,
in one form or another, somewhere and at some time. Hitler could
help him understand Zaspar Makann.

By the time the ship came out, with the yellow sun of Tanith
in the middle of the screen, he knew a great deal about Hitler,
occasionally referred to as Schicklgruber, and he understood, with
sorrow, how the lights of civilization on Marduk were going out.

Beside the _Lamia_, stripped of her Dillinghams and crammed with
heavy armament and detection instruments, the _Space Scourge_ and
the _Queen Flavia_ were on off-planet watch. There were half a dozen
other ships on orbit just above atmosphere; a Gilgamesher, one of
the Gram-Tanith freighters, a couple of free-lance Space Vikings,
and a new and unfamiliar ship. When he asked the moonbase who she
was, he was told that she was the _Sun Goddess_, Amaterasu. That
was, by almost a year, better than he had expected of them. Otto
Harkaman was out in the _Corisande_, raiding and visiting the
trade-planets.

He found his cousin, Nikkolay Trask, at Rivington; when he inquired
about Traskon, Nikkolay cursed.

"I don't know anything about Traskon; I haven't anything to do with
Traskon, any more. Traskon is now the personal property of our well
loved--very well loved--Queen Evita. The Trasks don't own enough
land on Gram now for a family cemetery. You see what you did?" he
added bitterly.

"You needn't rub it in, Nikkolay. If I'd stayed on Gram, I'd have
helped put Angus on the throne, and it would have been about the
same in the end."

"It could be a lot different," Nikkolay said. "You could bring
your ships and men back to Gram and put yourself on the throne."

"No; I'll never go back to Gram. Tanith's my planet, now. But I will
renounce my allegiance to Angus. I can trade on Morglay or Joyeuse
or Flamberge just as easily."

"You won't have to; you can trade with Newhaven and Bigglersport.
Count Lionel and Duke Joris are both defying Angus; they've refused
to furnish him men, they've driven out his tax collectors, those
they haven't hanged, and they're building ships of their own. Angus
is building ships, too. I don't know whether he's going to use them
to fight Bigglersport and Newhaven, or attack you, but there's going
to be a war before another year's out."

The _Goodhope_ and the _Speedwell_, he found, had gone back to Gram.
They were commanded by men who had come into favor at the court of
King Angus recently. The _Black Star_ and the _Queen Flavia_--whose
captain had contemptuously ignored an order from Gram to re-christen
her _Queen Evita_--had remained. They were his ships, not King
Angus'. The captain of the merchantman from Wardshaven now on orbit
refused to take a cargo to Newhaven; he had been chartered by King
Angus, and would take orders from no one else.

"All right," Trask told him. "This is your last voyage here. You
bring that ship back under Angus of Wardshaven's charter and we'll
fire on her."

Then he had the regalia he had worn in his last audiovisual to
Angus dusted off. At first, he had decided to proclaim himself
King of Tanith. Lord Valpry, Baron Rathmore and his cousin all
advised against it.

"Just call yourself Prince of Tanith," Valpry said. "The title won't
make any difference in your authority here, and if you do lay claim
to the throne of Gram, nobody can say you're a foreign king trying
to annex the planet."

He had no intention of doing anything of the kind, but Valpry was
quite in earnest.

So he sat on his throne, as sovereign Prince of Tanith, and
renounced his allegiance to "Angus, Duke of Wardshaven, self-styled
King of Gram." They sent it back on the otherwise empty freighter.
Another copy went to the Count of Newhaven, along with a cargo in
the _Sun Goddess_, the first non-Space-Viking ship into Gram from
the Old Federation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Seven hundred and fifty hours after the return of the _Nemesis_,
the _Corisande II_ emerged from her last microjump, and immediately
Harkaman began hearing of the Battle of Audhumla and the destruction
of the _Yo-Yo_ and the _Enterprise_. At first, he merely reported a
successful raiding voyage, from which he was bringing rich booty.
Oddly varigated booty, it was remarked, when he began itemizing it.

"Why, yes," he replied. "Secondhand booty. I raided Dagon for it."

Dagon was a Space Viking base planet, occupied by a character named
Fedrig Barragon. A number of ships operated from it, including a
couple commanded by Barragon's half-breed sons.

"Barragon's ships were raiding one of our planets," Harkaman said.
"Ganpat. They looted a couple of cities, destroyed one, killed a lot
of the locals. I found out about it from Captain Ravallo of the
_Black Star_, on Indra; he'd just been from Ganpat. Beowulf wasn't
too far out of the way, so we put in there, and found the
_Grendelsbane_ just ready to space out." The _Grendelsbane_ was the
second of Beowulf's ships, sister to the _Viking's Gift_. "So she
joined us, and the three of us went to Dagon. We blew up one of
Barragon's ships, and put the other one down out of commission, and
then we sacked his base. There was a Gilgamesher colony there; we
didn't bother them. They'll tell what we did, and why."

"That should furnish Prince Viktor of Xochitl something to ponder,"
Trask said. "Where are the other ships, now?"

"The _Grendelsbane_ went back to Beowulf; she'll stop at Amaterasu
to do a little trading on the way. The _Black Star_ went to Xochitl.
Just a friendly visit, to say hello to Prince Viktor for you.
Ravallo has a lot of audiovisuals we made during the Dagon
Operation. Then she's going to Jagannath to visit Nikky Gratham."

       *       *       *       *       *

Harkaman approved his attitude and actions with regard to King Angus.

"We don't need to do business with the Sword-Worlds at all. We have
our own industries, we can produce what we need, and we can trade
with Beowulf and Amaterasu, and with Xochitl and Jagannath and Hoth,
if we can make any sort of agreement with them; everybody agrees to
let everybody else's trade-planets alone. It's too bad you couldn't
get some kind of an agreement with Marduk." Harkaman regretted that
for a few seconds, and then shrugged. "Our grandchildren, if any,
will probably be raiding Marduk."

"You think it'll be like that?"

"Don't you? You were there; you saw what's happening. The barbarians
are rising; they have a leader, and they're uniting. Every society
rests on a barbarian base. The people who don't understand
civilization, and wouldn't like it if they did. The hitchhikers.
The people who create nothing, and who don't appreciate what others
have created for them, and who think civilization is something that
just exists and that all they need to do is enjoy what they can
understand of it--luxuries, a high living standard, and easy work
for high pay. Responsibilities? Phooey! What do they have
a government for?"

Trask nodded. "And now, the hitchhikers think they know more about
the car than the people who designed it, so they're going to grab
the controls. Zaspar Makann says they can, and he's the Leader." He
poured a drink from a decanter that had been looted on Pushan; there
was a planet where a republic had been overthrown in favor of a
dictatorship four centuries ago, and the planetary dictatorship had
fissioned into a dozen regional dictatorships, and now they were
down to the peasant-village and handcraft-industry level. "I don't
understand it, though. I was reading about Hitler, on the way home.
I wouldn't be surprised if Zaspar Makann had been reading about
Hitler, too. He's using all Hitler's tricks. But Hitler came to
power in a country which had been impoverished by a military defeat.
Marduk hasn't fought a war in almost two generations, and that one
was a farce."

"It wasn't the war that put Hitler into power. It was the fact that
the ruling class of his nation, the people who kept things running,
were discredited. The masses, the homemade barbarians, didn't have
anybody to take their responsibilities for them. What they have on
Marduk is a ruling class that has been discrediting itself. A ruling
class that's ashamed of its privileges and shirks its duties. A
ruling class that has begun to believe that the masses are just as
good as they are, which they manifestly are not. And a ruling class
that won't use force to maintain its position. And they have a
democracy, and they are letting the enemies of democracy shelter
themselves behind democratic safeguards."

"We don't have any of this democracy in the Sword-Worlds, if that's
the word for it," he said. "And our ruling class aren't ashamed of
their power, and our people aren't hitchhikers, and as long as they
get decent treatment they don't try to run things. And we're not
doing so well."

The Morglay dynastic war of a couple of centuries ago, still
sputtering and smoking. The Oskarsan-Elmersan War on Durendal, into
which Flamberge and now Joyeuse had intruded. And the situation on
Gram, fast approaching critical mass. Harkaman nodded agreement.

"You know why? Our rulers are the barbarians among us. There isn't
one of them--Napolyon of Flamberge, Rodolf of Excalibur, or Angus of
about half of Gram--who is devoted to civilization or anything else
outside himself, and that's the mark of the barbarian."

"What are you devoted to, Otto?"

"You. You are my chieftain. That's another mark of the barbarian."

       *       *       *       *       *

Before he had left Marduk, Admiral Shefter had ordered a ship to
Gimli to check on the _Honest Horris_; a few men and a pinnace would
be left behind to contact any ship from Tanith. He sent Boake
Valkanhayn off in the _Space Scourge_.

Lionel of Newhaven's _Blue Comet_ came in from Gram with a cargo of
general merchandise. Her captain wanted fissionables and gadolinium;
Count Lionel was building more ships. There was a rumor that Omfray
of Glaspyth was laying claim to the throne of Gram, in the right
of his great-grandmother's sister, who had been married to the
great-grandfather of Duke Angus. It was a completely trivial and
irrelevant claim, but the story was that it would be supported
by King Konrad of Haulteclere.

[Illustration]

Immediately, Baron Rathmore, Lord Valpry, Lothar Ffayle and the other
Gram people began clamoring that he should go back with a fleet and
seize the throne for himself. Harkaman, Valkanhayn, Karffard and the
other Space Vikings were as vehement against it. Harkaman had the
loss of the other _Corisande_ on Durendal to remember, and the others
wanted no part in Sword-World squabbles, and there was renewed
agitation that he should start calling himself King of Tanith.

He refused to do either, which left both parties dissatisfied. So
partisan politics had finally come to Tanith. Maybe that was another
milestone of progress.

And there was the Treaty of Khepera, between the Princely State of
Tanith, the Commonwealth of Beowulf, and the Planetary League of
Amaterasu. The Kheperans agreed to allow bases on their planet, to
furnish workers, and to send students to school on all three planets.
Tanith, Beowulf and Amaterasu obligated themselves to joint defense
of Khepera, to free trade among themselves, and to render one another
armed assistance.

That _was_ a milestone of progress, and no argument about it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Space Scourge_ returned from Gimli, and Valkanhayn reported
that nobody on the planet had ever seen or heard of the _Honest
Horris_. They had found a Mardukan Navy ship's pinnace there, manned
entirely by officers, some of them Navy Intelligence. According to
them, the investigation into the activities of that ship had come to
an impasse. The ostensible owners claimed, and had papers to prove
it, that they had chartered her to a private trader, and he claimed,
and had papers to prove it, that he was a citizen of the Planetary
Republic of Aton, and as soon as they began questioning him, he was
rescued by the Atonian ambassador, who lodged a vehement protest
with the Mardukan Foreign Ministry. Immediately, the People's
Welfare Party had leaped into the incident and branded the
investigation as an unwarranted persecution of a national of a
friendly power at the instigation of corrupt tools of the Gilgamesh
Interstellar Conspiracy.

"So that's it," Valkanhayn finished. "It seems they're having an
election and they're afraid to antagonize anybody who might have a
vote. So the Navy had to drop the investigation. Everybody on
Marduk's scared of this Makann. You think there might be some tie-up
between him and Dunnan?"

"The idea's occurred to me. Have there been any more raids on Marduk
trade-planets since the Battle of Audhumla?"

"A couple. The _Bolide_ was on Audhumla a while ago. There were a
couple of Mardukan ships there, and they had the _Victrix_ fixed up
enough to do some fighting. They ran the _Bolide_ out."

A study of the time between the destruction of the _Enterprise_
and _Yo-Yo_ and the appearance of the _Bolide_ could give them a
limiting radius around Audhumla. It did; seven hundred light-years,
which also included Tanith.

So he sent Harkaman in the _Corisande_ and Ravallo in the _Black
Star_ to visit the planets Marduk traded with, looking for Dunnan
ships and exchanging information and assistance with the Royal
Mardukan Navy. Almost at once, he regretted it; the next Gilgamesher
into orbit on Tanith brought a story that Prince Viktor was
collecting a fleet on Xochitl. He sent warnings off to Amaterasu
and Beowulf and Khepera.

A ship came in from Bigglersport, a heavily armed chartered
freighter. There was sporadic fighting in a dozen places on Gram,
now--resistance to efforts on the part of King Angus to collect
taxes, and raids by unidentified persons on estates confiscated
from alleged traitors and given to Garvan Spasso, who had now
been promoted from Baron to Count. And Rovard Grauffis was dead;
poisoned, everybody said, either by Spasso or Queen Evita or both.
Even with the threat from Xochitl, some of the former Wardshaven
nobles began talking about sending ships to Gram.

Less than a thousand hours after he had left, Ravallo was back
in the _Black Star_.

"I went to Gimli, and I wasn't there fifty hours before a
Mardukan Navy ship came in. They were glad to see me; it saved
them sending off a pinnace for Tanith. They had news for you, and
a couple of passengers."

"Passengers?"

"Yes. You'll see who they are when they come down. And don't let
anybody with side-whiskers and buttoned-up coats see them," Ravallo
said. "What those people know gets all over the place before long."

       *       *       *       *       *

The visitors were Lucile, Princess Bentrik, and her son, the young
Count of Ravary. They dined with Trask; only Captain Ravallo was
also present.

"I didn't want to leave my husband, and I didn't want to come here
and impose myself and Steven on you, Prince Trask," she began, "but
he insisted. We spent the whole voyage to Gimli concealed in the
captain's quarters; only a few of the officers knew we were aboard."

"Makann won the election. Is that it?" he asked. "And Prince Bentrik
doesn't want to risk you and Steven being used as hostages?"

"That's it," she said. "He didn't really win the election, but he
might as well have. Nobody has a majority of seats in the Chamber of
Representatives but he's formed a coalition with several of the
splinter parties, and I'm ashamed to say that a number of Crown
Loyalist members--Crowd of Disloyalists, I call them--are voting
with him, now. They've coined some ridiculous phrase about the 'wave
of the future,' whatever that means."

"If you can't lick them, join them," Trask said.

"If you can't lick them, lick their boots," the Count of Ravary put in.

"My son is a trifle bitter," Princess Bentrik said. "I must confess
to a trace of bitterness, too."

"Well, that's the Representatives," Trask said. "What about the rest
of the government?"

"With the splinter-party and Disloyalist support, they got a
majority of seats in the Delegates. Most of them would have
indignantly denied, a month before, having any connection with
Makann, but a hundred out of a hundred and twenty are his
supporters. Makann, of course, is Chancellor."

"And who is Prime Minister?" he asked. "Andray Dunnan?"

She looked slightly baffled for an instant then said, "Oh. No.
The Prime Minister is Crown Prince Edvard. No; Baron Cragdale.
That isn't a royal title, so by some kind of a fiction I can't
pretend to understand he is not Prime Minister as a member of
the Royal Family."

"If you can't ..." the boy started.

"Steven! I forbid you to say that about ... Baron Cragdale. He
believes, very sincerely, that the election was an expression of
the will of the people, and that it is his duty to bow to it."

He wished Otto Harkaman were there. He could probably name, without
stopping for breath, a hundred great nations that went down into
rubble because their rulers believed that they should bow instead
of rule, and couldn't bring themselves to shed the blood of their
people. Edvard would have been a fine and admirable man, as a little
country baron. Where he was, he was a disaster.

He asked if the People's Watchman had dragged their guns out from
under the bed and started carrying them in public yet.

"Oh, yes. You were quite right; they were armed, all the time. Not
just small arms; combat vehicles and heavy weapons. As soon as the
new government was formed, they were given status as a part of the
Planetary Armed Forces. They have taken over every police station
on the planet."

"And the King?"

"Oh, he carries on, and shrugs and says, 'I just reign here.' What
else can he do? We've been whittling down and filching away the
powers of the Throne for the last three centuries."

"What is Prince Bentrik doing, and why did he think there was danger
that you two would be used as hostages?"

"He's going to fight," she said. "Don't ask me how, or what with.
Maybe as a guerrilla in the mountains, I don't know. But if he can't
lick them, he won't join them. I wanted to stay with him and help
him; he told me I could help him best by placing myself and Steven
where he wouldn't worry about us."

"I wanted to stay," the boy said. "I could have fought with him.
But he said that I must take care of Mother. And if he were killed,
I must be able to avenge him."

"You talk like a Sword-Worlder; I told you that once before." He
hesitated, then turned again to Princess Bentrik. "How is little
Princess Myrna?" he asked, and then, trying to be casual, added,
"and Lady Valerie?"

She seemed so clearly real and present to him, blue eyes and
space-black hair, more real than Elaine had been to him for years.

"They're at Cragdale; they'll be safe there. I hope."




XXIV


Attempting to conceal the presence on Tanith of Prince Bentrik's
wife and son was pushing caution beyond necessity. Admitted that
the news would leak back to Marduk via Gilgamesh, it was over seven
hundred light-years to the latter and almost a thousand from there
to the former. Better that Princess Lucile should enjoy Rivington
society, such as it was, and escape, for a moment now and then, from
anxiety about her husband. At ten--no, almost twelve; it had been a
year and a half since Trask had left Marduk--the boy Count of Ravary
was more easily diverted. At last, he was among real Space Vikings,
on a Space Viking planet, and he was trying to be everywhere and see
everything at once. No doubt he would be imagining himself a Space
Viking, returning to Marduk with a vast armada to rescue his father
and the King from Zaspar Makann.

Trask was satisfied with that; as a host he left much to be desired.
He had his worries, too, and all of them bore the same name: Prince
Viktor of Xochitl. He went over with Manfred Ravallo everything the
captain of the _Black Star_ could tell him. He had talked once with
Viktor; the lord of Xochitl had been coldly polite and noncommittal.
His subordinates had been frankly hostile. There had been five ships
on orbit or landed at Viktor's spaceport beside the usual
Gilgameshers and itinerant traders, two of them Viktor's own, and a
big armed freighter had come in from Haulteclere as the _Black Star_
was leaving. There was considerable activity at the shipyards and
around the spaceport, as though in preparation for something on a
large scale.

Xochitl was a thousand light-years from Tanith. He rejected
immediately the idea of launching a preventative attack; his ships
might reach Xochitl to find it undefended, and then return to find
Tanith devastated. Things like that had happened in space-war. The
only thing to do was sit tight, defend Tanith when Viktor attacked,
and then counterattack if he had any ships left by that time.
Prince Viktor was probably reasoning in the same way.

He had no time to think about Andray Dunnan, except, now and then,
to wish that Otto Harkaman would stop thinking about him and bring
the _Corisande_ home. He needed that ship on Tanith, and the wits
and courage of her commander.

More news--Gilgamesh sources--came in from Xochitl. There were only
two ships, both armed merchantmen, on the planet. Prince Viktor had
spaced out with the rest an estimated two thousand hours before the
story reached him. That was twice as long as it would take the
Xochitl armada to reach Tanith. He hadn't gone to Beowulf; that was
only sixty-five hours from Tanith and they would have heard about
it long ago. Or Amaterasu, or Khepera. How many ships he had was
a question; not fewer than five, and possibly more. He could have
slipped into the Tanith system and hidden his ships on one of the
outer uninhabitable planets. He sent Valkanhayn and Ravallo
microjumping their ships from one to another to check. They returned
to report in the negative. At least, Viktor of Xochitl wasn't camped
inside their own system, waiting for them to leave Tanith open
to attack.

But he was somewhere, and up to nothing even resembling good, and
there was no possible way of guessing when his ships would be
emerging on Tanith. The only thing to do was wait for him. When he
did, Trask was confident that he would emerge from hyperspace into
serious trouble. He had the _Nemesis_, the _Space Scourge_, the
_Black Star_ and _Queen Flavia_, the strongly rebuilt _Lamia_, and
several independent Space Viking ships, among them the _Damnthing_
of his friend Roger-fan-Morvill Esthersan, who had volunteered to
stay and help in the defense. This, of course, was not pure
altruism. If Viktor attacked and had his fleet blown to
Em-See-Square, Xochitl would lie open and unprotected, and there
was enough loot on Xochitl to cram everybody's ships. Everybody's
ships who had ships when the Battle of Tanith was over, of course.

He was apologetic to Princess Bentrik:

"I'm very sorry you jumped out of Zaspar Makann's frying pan into
Prince Viktor's fire," he began.

She laughed at that. "I'll take my chances on the fire. I seem to
see a lot of good firemen around. If there is a battle you will see
that Steven's in a safe place, won't you?"

"In a space attack, there are no safe places. I'll keep him with me."

The young Count of Ravary wanted to know which ship he would serve
on when the attack came.

"Well, you won't be on any ship, Count. You'll be on my staff."

       *       *       *       *       *

Two days later, the _Corisande_ came out of hyperspace. Harkaman was
guardedly noncommittal by screen. Trask took a landing craft and
went out to meet the ship.

"Marduk doesn't like us, any more," Harkaman told him. "They have
ships on all their trade-planets, and they all have orders to fire
on any, repeat any, Space Vikings, including the ships of the
self-styled Prince of Tanith. I got this from Captain Garravay of
the _Vindex_. After we were through talking, we fought a nice little
ship-to-ship action for him to make films of. I don't think anybody
could see anything wrong with it."

"This order came from Makann?"

"From the Admiral commanding. He isn't your friend Shefter; Shefter
retired on account of quote ill-health unquote. He is now in a quote
hospital unquote."

"Where's Prince Bentrik?"

"Nobody knows. Charges of high treason were brought against him,
and he just vanished. Gone underground, or secretly arrested and
executed; take your choice."

He wondered just what he'd tell Princess Lucile and Count Steven.

"They have ships on all the planets they trade with. Fourteen
of them. That isn't to catch Dunnan. That's to disperse the Navy
away from Marduk. They don't trust the Navy. Is Prince Edvard
still Prime Minister?"

"Yes, as of Garravay's last information. It seems Makann is behaving
in a scrupulously legal manner, outside of making his People's
Watchmen part of the armed forces. Protesting his devotion to
the King every time he opens his mouth."

"When will the fire be, I wonder?"

"Huh? Oh yes, you were reading up on Hitler. That I don't know.
Probably happened by now."

He just told Princess Lucile that her husband had gone into hiding;
he couldn't be sure whether she was relieved or more worried. The
boy was sure that he was doing something highly romantic and heroic.

Some of the volunteers tired of waiting, after another thousand
hours, and spaced out. The _Viking's Gift_ of Beowulf came in with
a cargo, and went on orbit after discharging it to join the watch.
A Gilgamesher came in from Amaterasu and reported everything quiet
there; as soon as her captain had sold his cargo, with a minimum of
haggling, he spaced out again. His behavior convinced everybody that
the attack would come in a matter of hours.

It didn't.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three thousand hours had passed since the first warning had reached
Tanith, that made five thousand since Viktor's ships were supposed
to have left Xochitl. There were those, Boake Valkanhayn among them,
who doubted, now, if he ever had.

"The whole thing's just a big Gilgamesher lie," he was declaring.
"Somebody--Nikky Gratham, or the Everrards, or maybe Viktor
himself--paid them to tell us that, to pin our ships down here.
Or they made it up themselves, so they could make hay on our
trade-planets."

"Let's go down to the Ghetto and clean out the whole gang," somebody
else took up. "Anything one of them's in, they're all in together."

"Nifflheim with that; let's all space out for Xochitl," Manfred
Ravallo proposed. "We have enough ships to lick them on Tanith,
we have enough to lick them on their own planet."

He managed to talk them out of both courses of action--what was he,
anyhow; sovereign Prince of Tanith, or the non-ruling King of Marduk,
or just the chieftain of a disciplineless gang of barbarians? One of
the independents spaced out in disgust. The next day, two others
came in, loaded with booty from a raid on Braggi, and decided to
stay around for a while and see what happened.

And four days after that, a five-hundred-foot hyperspace yacht,
bearing the daggers and chevrons of Bigglersport, came in. As soon
as she was out of the last microjump, she began calling by screen.

Trask didn't know the man who was screening, but Hugh Rathmore did;
Duke Joris' confidential secretary.

"Prince Trask; I must speak to you as soon as possible," he began,
almost stuttering. Whatever the urgency of his mission, one would
have thought that a three-thousand-hour voyage would have taken some
of the edge from it. "It is of the first importance."

"You are speaking to me. This screen is reasonably secure. And if
it's of the first importance, the sooner you tell me about it...."

"Prince Trask, you must come to Gram, with every man and every ship
you can command. Satan only knows what's happening there now, but
three thousand hours ago, when the Duke sent me off, Omfray of Glaspyth
was landing on Wardshaven. He has a fleet of eight ships, furnished
to him by his wife's kinsman, the King of Haulteclere. They are commanded
by King Konrad's Space Viking cousin, the Prince of Xochitl."

Then a look of shocked surprise came into the face of the man in the
screen, and Trask wondered why, until he realized that he had leaned
back in his chair and was laughing uproariously. Before he could
apologize, the man in the screen had found his voice.

"I know, Prince Trask; you have no reason to think kindly of King
Angus--the former King Angus, or maybe even the late King Angus,
I suppose he is now--but a murderer like Omfray of Glaspyth...."

       *       *       *       *       *

It took a little time to explain to the confidential secretary of
the Duke of Bigglersport the humor of the situation.

There were others at Rivington to whom it was not immediately
evident. The professional Space Vikings, men like Valkanhayn and
Ravallo and Alvyn Karffard, were disgusted. Here they'd been
sitting, on combat alert, all these months, and, if they'd only
known, they could have gone to Xochitl and looted it clean long ago.
The Gram party were outraged. Angus of Wardshaven had been bad
enough, with the hereditary taint of the Mad Baron of Blackcliffe,
and Queen Evita and her rapacious family, but even he was preferable
to a murderous villain--some even called him a fiend in human
shape--like Omfray of Glaspyth.

Both parties, of course, were positive as to where their Prince's
duty lay. The former insisted that everything on Tanith that could
be put into hyperspace should be dispatched at once to Xochitl, to
haul back from it everything except a few absolutely immovable
natural features of the planet. The latter clamored, just as loudly
and passionately, that everybody on Tanith who could pull a trigger
should be embarked at once on a crusade for the deliverance of Gram.

[Illustration]

"You don't want to do either, do you?" Harkaman asked him, when they
were alone after the second day of acrimony.

"Nifflheim, no! This crowd that wants an attack on Xochitl; you know
what would happen if we did that?" Harkaman was silent, waiting for
him to continue. "Inside a year, four or five of these small
planet-holders like Gratham and the Everrards would combine against
us and make a slag-pile out of Tanith."

Harkaman nodded agreement. "Since we warned him the first time,
Viktor's kept his ships away from our planets. If we attacked
Xochitl now, without provocation, nobody'd know what to expect from
us. People like Nikky Gratham and Tobbin of Nergal and the Everrards
of Hoth get nervous around unpredictable dangers, and when they get
nervous they get trigger-happy." He puffed slowly on his pipe and
then said: "Then you'll be going back to Gram."

"That doesn't follow; just because Valkanhayn and Ravallo and that
crowd are wrong doesn't make Valpry and Rathmore and Ffayle right.
You heard what I was telling those very people at Karvall House, the
day I met you. And you've seen what's been happening on Gram since
we came out here. Otto, the Sword-Worlds are finished; they're half
decivilized now. Civilization is alive and growing here on Tanith.
I want to stay here and help it grow."

"Look, Lucas," Harkaman said. "You're Prince of Tanith, and I'm only
the Admiral. But I'm telling you; you'll have to do something, or
this whole setup of yours will fall apart. As it stands, you can
attack Xochitl and the Back-To-Gram party would go along, or you
can decide on this crusade against Omfray of Glaspyth and the
Raid-Xochitl-Now party would go along. But if you let this go on
much longer, you won't have any influence over either party."

"And then I will be finished. And in a few years, Tanith will be
finished." He rose and paced across the room and back. "Well, I
won't raid Xochitl; I told you why, and you agreed. And I won't
spend the men and ships and wealth of Tanith in any Sword-World
dynastic squabble. Great Satan, Otto; you were in the Durendal War.
This is the same thing, and it'll go on for another half a century."

"Then what will you do?"

"I came out here after Andray Dunnan, didn't I?" he asked.

"I'm afraid Ravallo and Valpry, or even Valkanhayn and Morland,
won't be as interested in Dunnan as you are."

"Then I will interest them in him. Remember, I was reading up on
Hitler, coming in from Marduk? I will tell them all a big lie.
Such a big lie that nobody will dare to disbelieve it."




XXV


"Do you think I was afraid of Viktor of Xochitl?" he demanded. "Half
a dozen ships; we could make a new Van Allen belt around Tanith of
them, with what we have here. Our real enemy is on Marduk, not
Xochitl; his name's Zaspar Makann. Zaspar Makann, and Andray Dunnan,
the man I came out from Gram to hunt; they're in alliance, and
I believe Dunnan is on Marduk, himself, now."

The delegation who had come out from Gram in the yacht of the
Duke of Bigglersport were unimpressed. Marduk was only a name to
them, one of the fabulous civilized Old Federation planets no
Sword-Worlder had ever seen. Zaspar Makann wasn't even that. And
so much had happened on Gram since the murder of Elaine Karvall and
the piracy of the _Enterprise_ that they had completely forgotten
Andray Dunnan. That put them at a disadvantage. All the people whom
they were trying to convince, the half-hundred members of the new
nobility of Tanith, spoke a language they didn't understand. They
didn't even understand the proposition, and couldn't argue against it.

Paytrik Morland, who was Gram-born and had been speaking for
a return in force to fight against Omfray of Glaspyth and his
supporters, defected from them at once. He had been on Marduk and
knew who Zaspar Makann was; he had made friends with the Royal Navy
officers, and had been shocked to hear that they were now enemies.
Manfred Ravallo and Boake Valkanhayn, among the more articulate of
the Raid-Xochitl-Now party, snatched up the idea and seemed
convinced that they'd thought of it themselves all along. Valkanhayn
had been on Gimli and talked to Mardukan naval officers; Ravallo had
brought Princess Bentrik to Tanith and heard her stories on the
voyage. They began adducing arguments in support of Trask's thesis.
Of course Dunnan and Makann were in collusion. Who tipped Dunnan off
that the _Victrix_ would be on Audhumla? Makann; his spies in the
Navy tipped him. What about the _Honest Horris_; wasn't Makann
blocking any investigation about her? Why was Admiral Shefter
retired as soon as Makann got into power?

"Well, here; we don't know anything about this Zaspar Makann," the
confidential secretary and spokesman of the Duke of Bigglersport began.

"No, you don't," Otto Harkaman told him. "I suggest you keep quiet
and listen, till you find out a little about him."

"Why, I wouldn't be surprised if Dunnan was on Marduk all the time
we were hunting for him," Valkanhayn said.

Trask began to wonder. What would Hitler have done if he'd told one
of his big lies, and then found it turning into the truth? Maybe
Makann had been on Marduk.... No; he couldn't have hidden half a
dozen ships on a civilized planet. Not even at the bottom of an
ocean.

"I wouldn't be surprised," Alvyn Karffard was shouting, "if Andray
Dunnan _was_ Zaspar Makann. I know he doesn't look like Dunnan, we
all saw him on screen, but there's such a thing as plastic surgery."

That was making the big lie just a trifle too big. Zaspar Makann was
six inches shorter than Dunnan; there are some things no plastic
surgery could do. Paytrik Morland, who had known Dunnan and had seen
Makann on screen, ought to have known that too, but he either didn't
think of it or didn't want to weaken a case he had completely accepted.

"As far as I can find out, nobody even heard of Makann till about
five years ago. That would be about the time Dunnan would have
arrived on Marduk," he said.

By this time, the big room in which they were meeting had become a
babel of voices, everybody trying to convince everybody else that
they'd known it all along. Then the Back-To-Gram party received its
_coup-de-grace_; Lothar Ffayle, to whom the emissaries of Duke Joris
had looked for their strongest support, went over.

"You people want us to abandon a planet we've built up from nothing,
and all the time and money we've invested in it, to go back to Gram
and pull your chestnuts out of the fire? Gehenna with you! We're
staying here and defending our own planet. If you're smart, you'll
stay here with us."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Bigglersport delegation was still on Tanith, trying to recruit
mercenaries from the King of Tradetown and dickering with a
Gilgamesher to transport them to Gram, when the big lie turned
into something like the truth.

The observation post on the Moon of Tanith picked up an emergence at
twenty light-minutes due north of the planet. Half an hour later,
there was another one at five light-minutes; a very small one, and
then a third at two light-seconds, and this was detectable by radar
and microray as a ship's pinnace. He wondered if something had
happened on Amaterasu or Beowulf; somebody like Gratham or the
Everrards might have decided to take advantage of the defensive
mobilization on Tanith. Then they switched the call from the pinnace
over to his screen, and Prince Simon Bentrik was looking out of it.

"I'm glad to see you! Your wife and son are here, worried about you,
but safe and well." He turned to shout to somebody to find young
Count Steven of Ravary and tell him to tell his mother. "How are you?"

"I had a broken leg when I left Moonbase, but that's mended on the
way," Bentrik said. "I have little Princess Myrna aboard with me.
For all I know, she's Queen of Marduk, now." He gulped slightly.
"Prince Trask, we've come as beggars. We're begging help for
our planet."

"You've come as honored guests, and you'll get all the help we can
give you." He blessed the Xochitl invasion scare, and the big lie
which was rapidly ceasing to be a lie; Tanith had the ships and
men and the will to act. "What happened? Makann deposed the King
and took over?"

It came to that, Bentrik told him. It had started even before the
election. The People's Watchmen had possessed weapons that had been
made openly and legally on Marduk for trade to the Neobarbarian
planets and then clandestinely diverted to secret People's Welfare
arsenals. Some of the police had gone over to Makann; the rest had
been terrorized into inaction. There had been riots fomented in
working-class districts of all the cities as pretexts for further
terrorization. The election had been a farce of bribery and
intimidation. Even so, Makann's party had failed of a complete
majority in the Chamber of Representatives, and had been compelled
to patch up a shady coalition in order to elect a favorable Chamber
of Delegates.

"And, of course, they elected Makann Chancellor; that did it,"
Bentrik said. "All the opposition leaders in the Chamber of
Representatives have been arrested, on all kinds of ridiculous
charges--sex-crimes, receiving bribes, being in the pay of foreign
powers, nothing too absurd. Then they rammed through a law
empowering the Chancellor to fill vacancies in the Chamber of
Representatives by appointment."

"Why did the Crown Prince lend himself to a thing like that?"

"He hoped that he could exercise some control. The Royal Family
is an almost holy symbol to the people. Even Makann was forced
to pretend loyalty to the King and the Crown Prince...."

"It didn't work; he played right into Makann's hands. What happened?"

The Crown Prince had been assassinated. The assassin, an unknown man
believed to be a Gilgamesher, had been shot to death by People's
Watchmen guarding Prince Edvard at once. Immediately Makann had
seized the Royal Palace to protect the King, and immediately there
had been massacres by People's Watchmen everywhere. The Mardukan
Planetary Army had ceased to exist; Makann's story was that there
had been a military plot against the King and the government.
Scattered over the planet in small detachments, the army had been
wiped out in two nights and a day. Now Makann was recruiting it up
again, exclusively from the People's Welfare Party.

"You weren't just sitting on your hands, were you?"

"Oh, no," Bentrik replied. "I was doing something I wouldn't have
thought myself capable of, a few years ago. Organizing a mutineering
conspiracy in the Royal Mardukan Navy. After Admiral Shefter was
forcibly retired and shut up in an insane asylum, I disappeared
and turned into a civilian contragravity-lifter operator at the
Malverton Navy Yard. Finally, when I was suspected, one of the
officers--he was arrested and tortured to death later--managed
to smuggle me onto a lighter for the Moonbase. I was an orderly
in the hospital there. The day the Crown Prince was murdered, we
had a mutiny of our own. We killed everybody we even suspected of
being a Makannist. The Moonbase has been under attack from the
planet ever since."

There was a stir behind him; turning, he saw Princess Bentrik and
the boy enter the room. He rose.

"We'll talk about this later. There are some people here...."

He motioned them forward and turned away, shoo-ing everybody else
out of the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

The news was all over Rivington, and then all over Tanith, while
the pinnace was still coming down. There was a crowd at the
spaceport, staring as the little craft, with its blazon of the
crowned and planet-throned dragon, settled onto its landing legs,
and reporters of the Tanith News Service with their screen pickups.
He met Prince Bentrik, a little in advance of the others, and
managed to whisper to him hastily:

"While you're talking to anybody here, always remember that Andray
Dunnan is working with Zaspar Makann, and as soon as Makann
consolidates his position he's sending an expedition against
Tanith."

"How in blazes did you find that out, here?" Bentrik demanded.
"From the Gilgameshers?"

Then Harkaman and Rathmore and Valkanhayn and Lothar Ffayle and
the others were crowding up behind, and more people were coming off
the pinnace, and Prince Bentrik was trying to embrace both his wife
and his son at the same time.

"Prince Trask." He started at the voice, and was looking into deep
blue eyes under coal-black hair. His pulse gave a sudden jump, and
he said, "Valerie!" and then, "Lady Alvarath; I'm most happy to see
you here." Then he saw who was beside her, and squatted on his heels
to bring himself down to a convenient size. "And Princess Myrna.
Welcome to Tanith, Your Highness!"

The child flung her arms around his neck. "Oh, Prince Lucas! I'm so
glad to see you. There's been such awful things happened!"

"There won't be anything awful happen here, Princess Myrna. You are
among friends; friends with whom you have a treaty. Remember?"

The child began to cry, bitterly. "That was when I was just a
play-Queen. And now I know what they meant when they talked about
when Grandpa and Pappa would be through being King. Pappa didn't
even get to be King!"

Something big and warm and soft was trying to push between them;
a dog with long blond hair and floppy ears. In a year and a half,
puppies can grow surprisingly. Mopsy was trying to lick his face.
He took the dog by the collar and straightened.

"Lady Valerie, will you come with us?" he asked. "I'm going to find
quarters for Princess Myrna."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Is it Princess Myrna, or is it Queen Myrna?" he asked.

Prince Bentrik shook his head. "We don't know. The King was alive
when we left Moonbase, but that was five hundred hours ago. We don't
know anything about her mother, either. She was at the Palace when
Prince Edvard was murdered; we've heard absolutely nothing about
her. The King made a few screen appearances, parroting things Makann
wanted him to say. Under hypnosis. That was probably the very least
of what they did to him. They've turned him into a zombi."

"Well, how did Myrna get to Moonbase?"

"That was Lady Valerie, as much as anybody else. She and Sir Thomas
Kobbly, and Captain Rainer. They armed the servants at Cragdale with
hunting rifles and everything else they could scrape up, captured
Prince Edvard's space-yacht, and took off in her. Took a couple of
hits from ground batteries getting off, and from ships around
Moonbase getting in. Ships of the Royal Mardukan Navy!" he added
furiously.

The pinnace in which they had made the trip to Tanith had taken
a few hits, too, running the blockade. Not many; her captain had
thrown her into hyperspace almost at once.

"They sent the yacht off to Gimli," Bentrik said. "From there,
they'll try to rally as many of the Royal Navy units as haven't gone
over to Makann. They're to assemble on Gimli and await my return.
If I don't return in fifteen hundred hours from the time I left
Moonbase, they're to use their own judgment. I'd expect that
they'd move in on Marduk and attack."

"That's sixty-odd days," Otto Harkaman said. "That's an awfully long
time to expect that lunar base to hold out, against a whole planet."

"It's a strong base. It was built four hundred years ago, when
Marduk was fighting a combination of six other planets. It held out
against continuous attack, once, for almost a year. It's been
constantly strengthened ever since."

"And what have they to throw at it?" Harkaman persisted.

"When I left, six ships of the former Royal Navy, that had gone
over to Makann. Four fifteen-hundred-footers, same class as the
_Victrix_, and two thousand-footers. Then, there were four of
Andray Dunnan's ships--"

"You mean, he really is on Marduk?"

"I thought you knew that, and I was wondering how you'd found out.
Yes: _Fortuna_, _Bolide_, and two armed merchantmen, a Baldurbuilt
ship called the _Reliable_, and your friend _Honest Horris_."

"You didn't really believe Dunnan was on Marduk?" Boake Valkanhayn
asked.

"Actually, I didn't. I had to have some kind of a story, to talk
those people out of that crusade against Omfray of Glaspyth." He
left unmentioned Valkanhayn's own insistence on a plundering
expedition against Xochitl. "Now that it turns out to be true,
I'm not surprised. We decided, long ago, that Dunnan was planning
to raid Marduk. It appears that we underestimated him. Maybe he
was reading about Hitler, too. He wasn't planning any raid; he
was planning conquest, in the only way a great civilization can
be conquered--by subversion."

"Yes," Harkaman put in. "Five years ago, when Dunnan started this
programme, who was this Makann, anyhow?"

"Nobody," Bentrik said. "A crackpot agitator in Drepplin; he had
a coven of fellow-crackpots, who met in the back room of a saloon
and had their office in a cigar box. The next year, he had a suite
of offices and was buying time on a couple of telecasts. The year
after that, he had three telecast stations of his own, and
was holding rallies and meetings of thousands of people. And
so on, upward."

"Yes. Dunnan financed him, and moved in behind him, the same way
Makann moved in behind the King. And Dunnan will have him shot
the way he had Prince Edvard shot, and use the murder as a pretext
to liquidate his personal followers."

"And then he'll own Marduk. And we'll have the Mardukan navy coming
out of hyperspace on Tanith," Valkanhayn added. "So we go to Marduk
and smash him now, while he's still little enough to smash."

There had been a few who had wanted to do that about Hitler, and
a great many, later, who had regretted that it hadn't been done.

"The _Nemesis_, the _Corisande_, and the _Space Scourge_ for sure?"
he asked.

Harkaman and Valkanhayn agreed; Valkanhayn thought the _Viking's
Gift_ of Beowulf would go along, and Harkaman was almost sure of
the _Black Star_ and _Queen Flavia_. He turned to Bentrik.

"Start that pinnace off for Gimli at once; within the hour if
possible. We don't know how many ships will be gathered there,
but we don't want them wasted in detail-attacks. Tell whoever's
in command there that ships from Tanith are on the way, and to
wait for them."

Fifteen hundred hours, less the five hundred Bentrik was in space
from Marduk. He hadn't time to estimate voyage-time to Gimli from
the other Mardukan trade-planets, and nobody could estimate how many
ships would respond.

"It may take us a little time to get an effective fleet together.
Even after we get through arguing about it. Argument," he told
Bentrik, "is not exclusively a feature of democracies."

       *       *       *       *       *

Actually, there was very little argument, and most of that among
the Mardukans. Prince Bentrik insisted that Crown Princess Myrna
would have to be taken along; King Mikhyl would be either dead or
brainwashed into imbecility by now, and they would have to have
somebody to take the throne. Lady Valerie Alvarath, Sir Thomas
Kobbly, the tutor, and the nurse Margot refused to be separated
from her. Prince Bentrik was equally firm, with less success, on
leaving his wife and son on Tanith. In the end, it was agreed that
the entire Mardukan party would space out on the _Nemesis_.

The leader of the Bigglersport delegation attempted an impassioned
tirade about going to the aid of strangers while their own planet
was being enslaved. He was booed down by everybody else and informed
that Tanith was being defended where a planet ought to be, on
somebody else's real estate. When the Bigglersporters emerged
from the meeting, they found that their own space-yacht had been
commandeered and sent off to Amaterasu and Beowulf for assistance,
that the regiment of local infantry they had enlisted from the King
of Tradetown had been taken over by the Rivington authorities, and
that the Gilgamesh freighter they had chartered to transport them
to Gram would now take them to Marduk.

The problem broke into two halves: the purely naval action that
would be fought to relieve the Moon of Marduk, if it still held out,
and to destroy the Dunnan and Makann ships, and the ground-fighting
problem of wiping out Makann's supporters and restoring the Mardukan
monarchy. A great many of the people of Marduk would be glad of
a chance to turn on Makann, once they had arms and were properly
supported. Combat weapons were almost unknown among the people,
however, and even sporting arms uncommon. All the small arms and
light artillery and auto-weapons available were gathered up.

The _Grendelsbane_ came in from Beowulf, and the _Sun Goddess_ from
Amaterasu. Three independent Space Viking ships were still in orbit
on Tanith; they joined the expedition. There would be trouble with
them on Marduk; they'd want to loot. Let the Mardukans worry about
that. They could charge it off as part of the price for letting
Zaspar Makann get into power in the first place.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were twelve spacecraft in line outside the Moon of Tanith,
counting the three independents and the forcibly chartered
Gilgamesher troop-transport; that was the biggest fleet Space
Vikings had ever assembled in their history. Alvyn Karffard said
as much while they were checking the formation by screen.

"It isn't a Space Viking fleet," Prince Bentrik differed. "There
are only three Space Vikings in it. The rest are the ships of three
civilized planets. Tanith, Beowulf and Amaterasu."

Karffard was surprised. "You mean _we're_ civilized planets? Like
Marduk, or Baldur or Odin, or...?"

"Well, aren't you?"

Trask smiled. He'd begun to suspect something of the sort a couple
of years ago. He hadn't really been sure until now. His most junior
staff officer, Count Steven of Ravary, didn't seem to appreciate
the compliment.

"We _are_ Space Vikings!" he insisted. "And we are going to battle
with the Neobarbarians of Zaspar Makann."

"Well, I won't argue the last half of it, Steven," his father told him.

"Are you people done yakking about who's civilized and who isn't?"
Guatt Kirbey asked. "Then give the signal. All the other ships are
ready to jump."

Trask pressed the button on the desk in front of him. A light went
on over Kirbey's control panel as one would on each of the other
ships. He said, "Jumping," around the stem of his pipe, and twisted
the red handle and shoved it in.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Four hundred and fifty hours, in the private universe that was the
_Nemesis_; outside, nothing else existed, and inside there was
nothing to do but wait, as each hour carried them six trillion miles
nearer to Gimli. At first, the ruthless and terrible Space Viking,
Steven, Count of Ravary, was wildly excited, but before long he
found that there was nothing exciting going on; it was just a
spaceship, and he'd been on ships before. Her Highness the Crown
Princess, or maybe her Majesty the Queen of Marduk, stopped being
excited about the same time, and she and Steven and Mopsy played
together. Of course, Myrna was only a girl, and two years younger
than Steven, but she was, or at least might be, his sovereign, and
beside, she had been in a space action, if you call what lies
between a planet and its satellite space and if you call being shot
at without being able to shoot back an action, and Relentless
Ravary, the Interstellar Terror, had not. This rather made up
for being a girl and a mere baby of going-on-ten.

One thing, there were no lessons. Sir Thomas Kobbly fancied himself
as a landscape-painter and spent most of his time arguing techniques
with Vann Larch, and Steven's tutor, Captain Rainer was a normal-space
astrogator and found a kindred spirit in Sharll Renner. This left
Lady Valerie Alvarath at a loose end. There were plenty of volunteers
to help her fill in the time, but Rank Hath Its Privileges; Trask
undertook to see to it that she did not suffer excessively from
shipboard ennui.

Sharll Renner and Captain Rainer approached him, during the cocktail
hour before dinner, some hundred hours short of emergence.

"We think we've figured out where Dunnan's base is," Renner said.

"Oh, good!" Everybody else had, on a different planet. "Where's yours?"

"Abaddon," the Count of Ravary's tutor said. When he saw that the
name meant nothing to Trask, he added, "The ninth, outer, planet of
the Marduk system." He said it disgustedly.

"Yes; remember how you had Boake and Manfred out with their ships,
checking our outside planets to see if Prince Viktor might be hiding
on one of them? Well, what with the time element, and the way the
_Honest Horris_ was shuttling back and forth from Marduk to some
place that wasn't Gimli, and the way Dunnan was able to bring his
ships in as soon as the shooting started on Marduk, we thought he
must be on an uninhabited outer planet of the Marduk system."

"I don't know why we never thought of that, ourselves," Rainer put
in. "I suppose because nobody ever thinks of Abaddon for any reason.
It's only a small planet, about four thousand miles in diameter, and
it's three and a half billion miles from primary. It's frozen solid.
It would take almost a year to get to it on Abbot drive, and if your
ship has Dillinghams, why not take a little longer and go to a good
planet? So nobody bothered with Abaddon."

But for Dunnan's purpose, it would be perfect. He called Prince
Bentrik and Alvyn Karffard to him; they found the idea instantly
convincing. They talked about it through dinner, and held a general
discussion afterward. Even Guatt Kirbey, the ship's pessimist, could
find no objection to it. Trask and Bentrik began at once making
battle plans. Karffard wondered if they hadn't better wait till they
got to Gimli and discuss it with the others.

"No," Trask told him. "This is the flagship; here's where the
strategy is decided."

"Well, how about the Mardukan Navy?" Captain Rainer asked. "I think
Fleet Admiral Bargham's in command at Gimli."

Prince Simon Bentrik was silent for a moment, as though he realized,
with reluctance, that the big decision was no longer avoidable.

"He may be, at present, but he won't be when I get there. I will be."

"But ... Your Highness, he's a fleet admiral; you're just a
commodore."

"I am not just a commodore. The King is a prisoner, and for all we
know dead. The Crown Prince is dead. The Princess Myrna is a child.
I am assuming the position of Regent and Prince-Protector of the Realm."




XXVI


There was a little difficulty on Gimli with Fleet Admiral Bargham.
Commodores didn't give orders to fleet admirals. Well, maybe regents
did, but who gave Prince Bentrik authority to call himself regent?
Regents were elected by the Chamber of Delegates, on nomination of
the Chancellor.

"That's Zaspar Makann and his stooges you're talking about?" Bentrik
laughed.

"Well, the Constitution...." He thought better of that, before
somebody asked him what Constitution. "Well, a Regent has to be
chosen by election. Even members of the Royal Family can't just
make themselves Regent by saying they are."

"I can. I just have. And I don't think there are going to be many
more elections, at least for the present. Not till we make sure the
people of Marduk can be trusted with the control of the government."

"Well, the pinnace from Moonbase reported that there were six Royal
navy battleships and four other craft attacking them," Bargham
objected. "I only have four ships here; I sent for the ones on the
other trade-planets, but I haven't heard from any of them. We can't
go there with only four ships."

"Sixteen ships," Bentrik corrected. "No, fifteen and one Gilgamesher
we're using for a troopship. I think that's enough. You'll remain
here on Gimli, in any case, admiral; as soon as the other ships come
in, you'll follow to Marduk with them. I am now holding a meeting
aboard the Tanith flagship _Nemesis_. I want your four ship-commanders
aboard immediately. I am not including you because you're remaining
here to bring up the late comers and as soon as this meeting is over
we are spacing out."

Actually, they spaced out sooner; the meeting lasted the whole three
hundred and fifty hours to Abaddon. A ship's captain, if he has a
good exec, as all of them had, needs only sit at his command-desk
and look important while the ship is going into and emerging from
a long jump; the rest of the time he can study ancient history or
whatever his shipboard hobby is. Rather than waste three hundred and
fifty hours of precious time, each captain turned his ship over to
his exec and remained aboard the _Nemesis_; even on so spacious a
craft the officers' country north of the engine rooms was crowded
like a tourist hotel in mid-season. One of the four Mardukans was
the Captain Garravay who had smuggled Bentrik's wife and son off
Marduk, and the other three were just as pro-Bentrik, pro-Tanith,
and anti-Makann. They were, on general principles, also anti-Bargham.
There must be something wrong with any fleet admiral who remained
in his command after Zaspar Makann came to power.

So, as soon as they spaced out, there was a party. After that,
they settled down to planning the Battle of Abaddon.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no Battle of Abaddon.

It was a dead planet, one side in night and the other in dim
twilight from the little speck of a sun three and a half billion
miles away, jagged mountains rising out of the snow that covered it
from pole to pole. The snow on top would be frozen CO_2; according
to the thermocouples, the surface temperature was well below
minus-100 Centigrade. No ships on orbit circled it; there was
a little faint radiation, which could have been from naturally
radioactive minerals; there was no electrical discharge detectable.

There was considerable bad language in the command room of the
_Nemesis_. The captains of the other ships were screening in,
wanting to know what to do.

"Go on in," Trask told them. "Englobe the planet, and go down to
within a mile if necessary. They could be hiding somewhere on it."

"Well, they're not hiding at the bottom of any ocean, that's for
sure," somebody said. It was one of those feeble jokes at which
everybody laughs because nothing else is laughable about the
situation.

Finally, they found it, at the north pole, which was no colder than
anywhere else on the planet. First radiation leakage, the sort that
would come from a closed-down nuclear power plant. Then a modicum of
electrical discharge. Finally the telescopic screens picked up the
spaceport, a huge oval amphitheater excavated out of a valley
between two jagged mountain ranges.

The language in the command room was just as bad, but the tone had
changed. It was surprising what a wide range of emotions could be
expressed by a few simple blasphemies and obscenities. Everybody
who had been deriding Sharll Renner were now acclaiming him.

But it was lifeless. The ships came crowding in; air-locked
landing-craft full of space-armored ground-fighters went down.
Screens in the command room lit as they transmitted in views.
Depressions in the carbon-dioxide snow where the hundred-foot
pad-feet of ships' landing-legs had pressed down. Ranks of
cargo-lighters that had plied to and from other ships or orbit.
And, all around the cliff-walled perimeter, air-locked doors to
caverns and tunnels. A great many men, with a great deal of equipment,
had been working here in the estimated five or six years since
Andray Dunnan--or somebody--had constructed this base.

Andray Dunnan. They found his badge, the crescent, blue on black, on
things. They found equipment that Harkaman recognized as having been
part of the original cargo stolen with the _Enterprise_. They even
found, in his living quarters, a blown-up photoprint picture of
Nevil Ormm, draped in black. But what they did not find was a single
vehicle small enough to be taken aboard a ship, or a single scrap of
combat equipment, not even a pistol or a hand grenade.

Dunnan had gone, but they knew whither, and where to find him.
The conquest of Marduk had moved into its final phase.

       *       *       *       *       *

Marduk was on the other side of the sun from Abaddon with
ninety-five million miles--close, but not inconveniently so, Trask
thought--to spare. Guatt Kirbey and the Mardukan astrogator who was
helping him made it within a light-minute. The Mardukan thought that
was fine; Kirbey didn't. The last microjump was aimed at the Moon of
Marduk, which was plainly visible in the telescopic screen. They
came out within a light-second and a half, which Kirbey admitted was
reasonably close. As soon as the screens cleared, they saw that they
weren't too late. The Moon of Marduk was under fire and firing back.

They'd have detection, and he knew what they were detecting--a clump
of sixteen rending distortions of the fabric of space-time, as
sixteen ships came into sudden existence in the normal continuum.
Beside him, Bentrik had a screen on; it was still milky-white,
and he was speaking into a radio hand-phone.

"Simon Bentrik, Prince-Protector of Marduk, calling Moonbase."
Then, slowly, he repeated his screen-combination twice. "Come in,
Moonbase; this is Simon Bentrik, Prince-Protector, speaking."

He waited ten seconds, and was about to start again, when the screen
flickered. The man who appeared in it wore the insignia of a
Mardukan navy commodore. He needed a shave, but he was grinning
happily. Bentrik greeted him by name.

"Hello, Simon; glad to see you. Your Highness, I mean; what is this
Prince-Protector thing?"

"Somebody had to do it. Is the King still alive?"

The grin slid off the commodore's face, starting with his eyes.

"We don't know. At first, Makann had him speaking by screen--you
know what it was like--urging everybody to obey and co-operate
with 'our trusted Chancellor.' Makann always appeared on the screen
with him."

Bentrik nodded. "I remember."

"Before you left, Makann kept quiet, and let the King make the
speech. After a while, the King wasn't able to speak coherently;
he'd stammer, and repeat. So then Makann did all the talking; they
couldn't even depend on him to parrot what they were giving him with
an earplug phone. Then he stopped appearing entirely. I suppose
there were physical symptoms they couldn't allow to be seen."
Bentrik was cursing horribly under his breath; the officer
at Moonbase nodded. "I hope for his sake that he is dead."

Poor Goodman Mikhyl. Bentrik was saying, "So do I." Trask agreed,
mentally. The commodore at Moonbase was still talking:

"We got two more renegade RMN ships, within a hundred hours after
you left." He named them. "And we got one of the Dunnan ships, the
_Fortuna_. We blew out the Malverton Navy Yard. They're still using
the Antarctic Naval Base, but we've knocked out a good deal of that.
We got the _Honest Horris_. They made two attempts to land on us and
lost a couple of ships. Eight hundred hours ago, they were joined by
the rest of Dunnan's fleet, five ships. They made a landing on
Malverton while it was turned away from us. Makann announced that
they were RMN units from the trade-planets that had joined him. I
suppose the planet-side public swallowed that. He also announced that
their commander, Admiral Dunnan, was in command of the People's
Armed Forces."

Dunnan's ground-fighters would be in control of Malverton. By now,
the odds were that Makann was as much his prisoner as King Mikhyl
VIII had been Makann's.

"So Dunnan has conquered Marduk. All he has to do, now, is make it
stick," he said. "I see four ships off Moonbase; how many more have
they?"

"These are _Bolide_ and _Eclipse_, Dunnan's ships, and former Royal
Mardukan Navy ships _Champion_ and _Guardian_. There are five
orbiting off the planet: Ex-RMNS _Paladin_, and Dunnan ships
_Starhopper_, _Banshee_, _Reliable_ and _Exporter_. The last
two are listed as merchantmen, but they're performing like
regulation battlecraft."

The four that had been circling Moonbase broke orbit and started
toward the relieving fleet; one took a hit from a Moonbase missile,
which staggered her but did no evident damage. Two ships which had
been orbiting the planet also changed course and started out. The
command room was silent except for a subdued chuckling from a
computer which was estimating enemy intentions by observed data and
Games Theory. Three more came hurrying out from the planet, and the
two in the lead slowed to let them catch up. He wanted to be able
to engage the four from off the satellite before the five from the
planet joined them, but Karffard's computers said it couldn't be done.

"All right, we have to take all our bad eggs in one basket," he
said. "Try to hit them as soon after they join as possible."

       *       *       *       *       *

The computers began chuckling again. The serving-robots were doing
a rush business in hot coffee. Prince Bentrik's son, sitting beside
his father, had stopped being Ruthless Ravary the Demon of the
Spaceways and was a very young officer going into his first space
battle, more scared and at the same time happier than he had ever
been in his short life. Captain Garravay of the _Vindex_ was making
signal to the other ships from Gimli: "_Royal Navy; smash the
traitors first!_" He could understand and sympathize, even if
he couldn't approve of putting personal ahead of tactical
considerations, and made a quick sealed-beam call to Harkaman to be
prepared to plug any holes they left in formation if they broke away
in search of vengeance. He also ordered the _Black Star_ and the
_Sun Goddess_ to shepherd the lightly armed and troop-crammed
Gilgamesh freighter out of danger. The two clumps of Dunnan-Makann
ships were converging rapidly, and Alvyn Karffard was screaming into
a phone to somebody to get more speed.

At a thousand miles, the missiles started going out, and the two
groups of ships, four and five, were equidistant from each other and
from the allied fleet, at the points of a triangle that was growing
smaller by the second. The first fire-globes of intercepted missiles
spread from their seeds of brief white light. A red light flashed on
the damage-board. An enemy ship took a hit. The captain of the
_Queen Flavia_ was on a screen, saying that his ship was heavily
damaged. Three ships bearing the Mardukan dragon-and-planet circled
madly around each other at what looked, in the screen, like just
over pistol-range, two of them firing into the third, which was
replying desperately. The third one blew up, and somebody was
yelling out of a screenspeaker, "Scratch one traitor!"

Another ship blew up somewhere, and then another. He heard somebody
say, "There went one of ours," and wondered which one it was. Not
the _Corisande_, he hoped; no, it wasn't, he could see her rushing
after two other ships which were, in turn, speeding toward the
_Black Star_, the _Sun Goddess_ and the Gilgamesh freighter. Then
the _Nemesis_ and the _Starhopper_ were within gun-range, pounding
each other savagely.

The battle had tied itself into a ball of gyrating, fire-spitting
ships that went rolling toward the planet, which was swinging in and
out of the main viewscreen and growing rapidly larger. By the time
they were down to the inner edge of the exosphere, the ball had
started to unwind, ship after ship dropping out of it and going
into orbit, some badly damaged and some going to attack damaged
enemies. Some of them were completely around the planet, hidden
by it. He saw three ships approaching _Corisande_, _Sun Goddess_,
and the Gilgamesher. He got Harkaman on the screen.

"Where's the _Black Star_?" he asked.

"Gone to Em-See-Square," Harkaman replied. "We got the two
Dunnan-Makanns. _Bolide_ and _Reliable_."

Then young Steven of Ravary, who had been monitoring one of the
intership screens, had a call from Captain Gompertz of the
_Grendelsbane_, and at the same moment somebody else was yelling,
"Here comes the _Starhopper_ again!"

"Tell him to wait a moment; we have troubles," he said.

_Nemesis_ and _Starhopper_ sledge-hammered each other and parried
with counter-missiles, and then, quite unexpectedly, the
_Starhopper_ went to Em-See-Square.

There was an awful lot of Em being converted to Ee off Marduk,
today. Including Manfred Ravallo; that grieved him. Manfred was
a good man, and a good friend. He had a girl in Rivington....
Nifflheim, there were eight hundred good men aboard the _Black
Star_, and most of them had girls who'd wait in vain for them on
Tanith. Well, what had Otto Harkaman said, so long ago, on Gram?
Something about old age not being a usual cause of death among
Space Vikings, wasn't it?

Then he remembered that Gompertz of the _Grendelsbane_ was trying
to get him. He told young Count Steven to switch him over.

"We just lost one of our Mardukans," Gompertz told him, in his
staccato Beowulf accent. "I think she was the _Challenger_. The ship
that got her looks like the _Banshee_; I'm turning to engage her."

"Which way; west around the planet? Be right with you, captain."




XXVII


It was like finishing a word puzzle. You sit staring at it, looking
for more spaces to print letters into, and suddenly you realize
that there are no more, that the puzzle is done. That was how the
space-battle of Marduk, the Battle _off_ Marduk, ended. Suddenly
there were no more colored fire-globes opening and fading, no more
missiles coming, no more enemy ships to throw missiles at. Now it
was time to take a count of his own ships, and then begin thinking
about the Battle _on_ Marduk.

The _Black Star_ was gone. So was RMNS _Challenger_, and RMNS
_Conquistador_. _Space Scourge_ was badly hammered; worse than after
the Beowulf raid, Boake Valkanhayn said. The _Viking's Gift_ was
heavily damaged, too, and so was the _Corisande_, and so, from the
looks of the damage board, was the _Nemesis_. And three ships were
missing--the three independent Space Vikings, _Harpy_, _Curse of
Cagn_, and Roger-fan-Morvill Esthersan's _Damnthing_.

Prince Bentrik frowned over that. "I can't think that all three
of those ships would have been destroyed, without anybody seeing
it happen."

"Neither can I. But I can think that all those ships broke out of
the battle together and headed in for the planet. They didn't come
here to help liberate Marduk, they came here to fill their cargo
holds. I only hope the people they're robbing all voted the Makann
ticket in the last election." A crumb of comfort occurred to him,
and he passed it on. "The only people who are armed to resist them
will be Makann's storm-troops and Dunnan's pirates; they'll be the
ones to get killed."

"We don't want any more killing than...." Prince Simon broke off
suddenly. "I'm beginning to talk like his late Highness Crown Prince
Edvard," he said. "He didn't want bloodshed, either, and look whose
blood was shed. If they're doing what you think they are, I'm afraid
we'll have to kill a few of your Space Vikings, too."

"They aren't my Space Vikings." He was a little surprised to find
that, after almost eight years of bearing the name himself, he was
using it as an other-people label. Well, why not? He was the ruler
of the civilized planet of Tanith, wasn't he? "But let's not start
fighting them till the main war's over. Those three shiploads are
no worse than a bad cold; Makann and Dunnan are the plague."

It would still take four hours to get down, in a spiral of
deceleration. They started the telecasts which had been filmed and
taped on the voyage from Gimli. The Prince-Protector Simon Bentrik
spoke: The illegal rule of the traitor Makann was ended. His deluded
followers were advised to return to their allegiance to the Crown.
The People's Watchmen were ordered to surrender their arms and
disband; in localities where they refused, the loyal people were
called upon to co-operate with the legitimate armed forces of
the Crown in exterminating them, and would be furnished arms
as soon as possible.

Little Princess Myrna spoke: "If my grandfather is still alive,
he is your King; if he is not, I am your Queen, and until I am old
enough to rule in my own right, I accept Prince Simon as Regent
and Protector of the Realm, and I call on all of you to obey him
as I will."

"You didn't say anything about representative government, or
democracy, or the constitution," Trask mentioned. "And I noticed
the use of the word 'rule,' instead of 'reign.'"

"That's right," the self-proclaimed Prince-Protector said. "There's
something wrong with democracy. If there weren't, it couldn't be
overthrown by people like Makann, attacking it from within by
democratic procedures. I don't think it's fundamentally unworkable.
I think it just has a few of what engineers call bugs. It's not
safe to run a defective machine till you learn the defects and
remedy them."

"Well, I hope you don't think our Sword-World feudalism doesn't have
bugs." He gave examples, and then quoted Otto Harkaman about barbarism
spreading downward from the top instead of upward from the bottom.

"It may just be," he added, "that there is something fundamentally
unworkable about government itself. As long as _Homo sapiens terra_
is a wild animal, which he has always been and always will be until
he evolves into something different in a million or so years, maybe
a workable system of government is a political science impossibility,
just as transmutation of elements was a physical-science impossibility
as long as they tried to do it by chemical means."

[Illustration]

"Then we'll just have to make it work the best way we can, and when
it breaks down, hope the next try will work a little better, for a
little longer," Bentrik said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Malverton grew in the telescopic screens as they came down. The Navy
Spaceport, where Trask had landed almost two years before, was in
wreckage, sprinkled with damaged ships that had been blasted on the
ground, and slagged by thermonuclear fires. There was fighting in
the air all over the city proper, on building-tops, on the ground,
and in the air. That would be the _Damnthing_-_Harpy_-_Curse of
Cagn_ Space Vikings. The Royal Palace was the center of one of
half a dozen swirls of battle that had condensed out of the
general skirmishing.

Paytrik Morland started for it with the first wave of
ground-fighters from the _Nemesis_. The Gilgamesh freighter, like
most of her ilk, had huge cargo ports all around; these began
opening and disgorging a swarm of everything from landing-craft
and hundred-foot airboats to one man air-cavalry single-mounts.
The top landing-stages and terraces of the palace were almost
obscured by the flashes of auto-cannon shells and the smoke and
dust of projectiles. Then the first vehicles landed, the firing
from the air stopped, and men fanned out as skirmishers,
occasionally firing with small arms.

Trask and Bentrik were in the armory off the vehicle-bay, putting on
combat equipment, when the twelve-year-old Count of Ravary joined
them and began rummaging for weapons and a helmet.

"You're not going," his father told him. "I'll have enough to worry
about taking care of myself...."

That was the wrong approach. Trask interrupted:

"You're to stay aboard, Count," he said. "As soon as things
stabilize, Princess Myrna will have to come down. You'll act as
her personal escort. And don't think you're being shoved into the
background. She's Crown Princess, and if she isn't Queen now, she
will be in a few years. Escorting her now will be the foundation of
your naval career. There isn't a young officer in the Royal Navy who
wouldn't trade places with you."

"That was the right way to handle him, Lucas," Bentrik approved,
after the boy had gone away, proud of his opportunity and his
responsibility.

"It'll do just what I said for him." He stopped for a moment, to
play with an idea that had just struck him. "You know, the girl will
be Queen in a few years, if she isn't now. Queens need Prince
Consorts. Your son's a good boy; I liked him the first moment I saw
him, and I've liked him better ever since. He'd be a good man on
the throne beside Queen Myrna."

"Oh, that's out of the question. Not the matter of consanguinity,
they're about a sixteenth cousin. But people would say I was abusing
the Protectorship to marry my son onto the Throne."

"Simon, speaking as one sovereign prince to another, you have a lot
to learn. You've learned one important lesson already, that a ruler
must be willing to use force and shed blood to enforce his rule. You
have to learn, too, that a ruler cannot afford to be guided by his
fears of what people will say about him. Not even what history will
say about him. A ruler's only judge is himself."

Bentrik slid the transpex visor of his helmet up and down
experimentally, checked the chambers of his pistol and carbine.

"All that matters to me is the peace and well-being of Marduk. I'll
have to talk it over with ... with my only judge. Well, let's go."

       *       *       *       *       *

The top terraces were secure when their car landed. More vehicles
were coming down and discharging men; a swarm of landing craft were
sinking past the building toward the ground two thousand feet below.
Auto-weapons and small arms and light cannon banged, and bombs and
recoilless-rifle shells crashed, on the lower terraces. They put the
car down one of the shaftways until they ran into heavy fire from
below, at the limit of the advance, and then turned into a broad
hallway, floating high enough to clear the heads of the men on foot.
It looked like the part of the Palace where he had lodged when he
had been a guest there but it probably wasn't.

They came to hastily constructed barricades of furniture and
statuary and furnishings, behind which Makann's People's Watchmen
and Andray Dunnan's Space Vikings were making resistance. They
entered rooms dusty with powdered plaster and acrid with powder
fumes, littered with corpses. They passed lifter-skids being towed
out with wounded. They went through rooms crowded with their own
men--"_Keep your fingers off things; this isn't a looting
expedition!_" "_You stupid cretin, how did you know there wasn't a
man hiding behind that?_" In one huge room, ballroom or concert room
or something, there were prisoners herded, and men from the
_Nemesis_ were setting up polyencephalographic veridicators, sturdy
chairs with wires and adjustable helmets and translucent globes
mounted over them. A couple of Morland's men were hustling a
People's Watchman to one and strapping him into a chair.

"You know what this is, don't you?" one of them was saying. "This is
a veridicator. That globe'll light blue; the moment you try to lie
to us, it'll turn red. And the moment it turns red, I'm going to
hammer your teeth down your throat with the butt of this pistol."

"Have you found anything out about the King, yet?" Bentrik asked him.

He turned. "No. Nobody we've questioned so far knows anything later
than a month ago about him. He just disappeared." He was going to
say something else, saw Bentrik's face, and changed his mind.

"He's dead," Bentrik said dully. "They tortured him and brainwashed
him and used him as a ventriloquist's dummy on the screen as long as
they could; when they couldn't let the people see him any more,
they stuffed him into a converter."

They did find Zaspar Makann, hours later. Maybe he could have told
them something, if he had been alive, but he and a few of his
fanatical followers had barricaded themselves in the Throne room and
died trying to defend it. They found Makann on the Throne, the top
of his head blown away, a pistol death-gripped in his hand, and the
Great Crown lying on the floor, the velvet inner cap bullet-pierced
and splattered with blood and brain tissue. Prince Bentrik picked it
up and looked at it disgustedly.

"We'll have to have something done about that," he said. "I really
didn't think he'd do just this. I thought he wanted to abolish the
Throne, not sit on it."

Except for one chandelier smashed and several corpses that had to be
dragged out, the Ministerial Council room was intact. They set up
headquarters there. Boake Valkanhayn and several other ship-captains
joined them. There was fighting going on in several places inside
the Palace, and the city was still in a turmoil. Somebody managed
to get in touch with the captains of the _Damnthing_, the _Harpy_
and the _Curse of Cagn_ and bring them to the Palace. Trask attempted
to reason with them, to no avail.

"Prince Trask, you're my friend, and you've always dealt fairly with
me," Roger-fan-Morvill Esthersan said. "But you know just how far
any Space Viking captain can control his crew. These men didn't come
here to correct the political mistakes of Marduk. They came here for
what they could haul away. I could get myself killed trying to stop
them now...."

"I wouldn't even try," the captain of the _Curse of Cagn_ put in.
"I came here for what I could make out of this planet, myself."

"You can try to stop them," said the captain of the _Harpy_.
"You'll find it even harder than what you're doing now."

Trask looked at some of the reports that had come in from elsewhere
on the planet. Harkaman had landed on one of the big cities to the
east, and the people had risen against Makann's local bosses and
were helping wipe out the People's Watchmen with arms they had been
furnished. Valkanhayn's exec had landed on a large concentration
camp where close to ten thousand of Makann's political enemies had
been penned; he had distributed all his available weapons and was
calling for more. Gompertz of the _Grendelsbane_ was at Drepplin;
he reported just the reverse. The people there had risen in support
of the Makann regime, and he wanted authorization to use nuclear
weapons against them.

"Could you talk your people into going to some other city?" Trask
asked. "We have a city for you; big industrial center. It ought to
be fine looting. Drepplin."

"The people there are Mardukan subjects, too," Bentrik began. Then
he shrugged. "It's not what we'd like to do, it's what we have to.
By all means, gentlemen. Take your men to Drepplin, and nobody will
object to anything you do."

"And when you have that place looted out, try Abaddon. You were
aground there, Captain Esthersan. You know what all Dunnan left there."

       *       *       *       *       *

A couple of Space Vikings--no, Royal Army of Tanith men--brought in
the old woman, dirty, in rags, almost exhausted.

"She wants to talk to Prince Bentrik; won't talk to anybody else.
Says she knows where the King is."

Bentrik rose quickly, brought her to a chair, poured a glass of wine
for her.

"He's still alive, Your Highness. The Crown Princess Melanie and I
... I'm sorry, Your Highness; Dowager Crown Princess ... have been
taking care of him, the best way we could. If you'll only come
quickly...."

Mikhyl VIII, Planetary King of Marduk, lay on a pallet of filthy
bedding on the floor of a narrow room behind a mass-energy converter
which disposed of the rubbish and sewage and generated power for
some of the fixed equipment on one of the middle floors of the east
wing of the palace. There was a bucket of water, and on a rough
wooden bench lay a cloth-wrapped bundle of food. A woman, haggard
and disheveled, wearing a suit of greasy mechanic's coveralls and
nothing else, squatted beside him. The Crown Princess Melanie, whom
Trask remembered as the charming and gracious hostess of Cragdale.
She tried to rise, and staggered.

"Prince Bentrik! And it's Prince Trask of Tanith!" she cried.
"Just hurry; get him out of here and to where he can be taken
care of. Please." Then she sat down again on the floor and fell
over, unconscious.

       *       *       *       *       *

They couldn't get the story. The Princess Melanie had collapsed
completely. Her companion, another noblewoman of the court, could
only ramble disconnectedly. And the King merely lay, bathed and
fed in a clean bed, and looked up at them wonderingly, as though
nothing he saw or heard conveyed any meaning to him. The doctors
could do nothing.

"He has no mind, no more mind than a new-born baby. We can keep him
alive, I don't know how long. That's our professional duty. But it's
no kindness to His Majesty."

       *       *       *       *       *

The little pockets of resistance in the Palace were wiped out,
through the next morning and afternoon. All but one, far
underground, below the main power plant. They tried sleep-gas; the
defenders had blowers and sent it back at them. They tried blasting;
there was a limit to what the fabric of the building would stand.
And nobody knew how long it would take to starve them out.

On the third day, a man crawled out, pushing a white shirt tied to
the barrel of a carbine ahead of him.

"Is Prince Lucas Trask of Tanith here?" he asked. "I won't speak to
anybody else."

They brought Trask quickly. All that was visible of the other man
was the carbine-barrel and the white shirt. When Trask called to
him, he raised his head above the rubble behind which he was hiding.

"Prince Trask, we have Andray Dunnan here; he was leading us, but
now we've disarmed him and are holding him. If we turn him over to
you, will you let us go?"

"If you all come out unarmed, and bring Dunnan with you, I promise
you, the rest of you will be let outside this building and allowed
to go away unharmed."

"All right. We'll be coming out in a minute." The man raised his
voice. "It's agreed!" he called. "Bring him out."

There were fewer than two score of them. Some wore the uniforms of
high officers of the People's Watchmen or of People's Welfare Party
functionaries; a few wore the heavily braided short jackets of Space
Viking officers. Among them, they propelled a thin-faced man with a
pointed beard, and Trask had to look twice at him before he
recognized the face of Andray Dunnan. It looked more like the face
of Duke Angus of Wardshaven as he last remembered it. Dunnan looked
at him in incurious contempt.

"Your dotard king couldn't rule without Zaspar Makann, and Makann
couldn't rule without me, and neither can you," he said. "Shoot this
gang of turncoats, and I'll rule Marduk for you." He looked at Trask
again. "Who are you?" he demanded. "I don't know you."

Trask slipped the pistol from his holster, thumbing off the safety.

"I am Lucas Trask. You've heard that name before," he said. "Stand
away from behind him, you people."

"Oh, yes; the poor fool who thought he was going to marry Elaine
Karvall. Well, you won't, Lord Trask of Traskon. She loves me, not
you. She's waiting for me now, on Gram...."

Trask shot him through the head. Dunnan's eyes widened in momentary
incredulity; then his knees gave way, and he fell forward on his
face. Trask thumbed on the safety and holstered the pistol, and
looked at the body on the concrete.

It hadn't made the least difference. It had been like shooting a
snake, or one of the nasty scorpion-things that infested the old
buildings in Rivington. Just no more Andray Dunnan.

"Take that carrion and stuff it in a mass-energy converter," he
said. "And I don't want anybody to mention the name of Andray Dunnan
to me again."

He didn't look at them haul Dunnan's body away on a lifter-skid;
he watched the fifty-odd leaders of the overthrown misgovernment
of Marduk shamble away to freedom, guarded by Paytrik Morland's
riflemen. Now there was something to reproach himself for; he'd
committed a separate and distinct crime against Marduk by letting
each one of them live. Unless recognized and killed by somebody
outside, every one of them would be at some villainy before next
sunrise. Well, King Simon I could cope with that.

He started when he realized how he had thought of his friend. Well,
why not? Mikhyl's mind was dead; his body would not survive it more
than a year. Then a child Queen, and a long regency, and long
regencies were dangerous. Better a strong King, in name as well as
power. And the succession could be safeguarded by marrying Steven
and Myrna. Myrna had accepted, at eight, that she must some day
marry for reasons of state; why not her playmate Steven?

And Simon Bentrik would see the necessity. He was neither a fool nor
a moral coward; he only needed to take some time to adjust to ideas.
The rabble who had bought their lives with their leader's had gone,
now. Slowly, he followed them, thinking.

Don't press the idea on Simon too hard; just expose him to it and
let him adopt it. And there would be the treaty--Tanith, Marduk,
Beowulf, Amaterasu; eventually, treaties with the other civilized
planets. Nebulously, the idea of a League of Civilized Worlds began
to take shape in his mind.

Be a good idea if he adopted the title of King of Tanith for
himself. And cut loose from the Sword-Worlds; especially cut loose
from Gram. Let Viktor of Xochitl have it. Or Garvan Spasso. Viktor
wouldn't be the last Space Viking to take his ships back against
the Sword-Worlds. Sooner or later, civilization in the Old Federation
would drive them all home to loot the planets that had sent them out.

Well, if he was going to be a king, shouldn't he have a queen? Kings
usually did. He climbed into the little hall-car and started up a
long shaft. There was Valerie Alvarath. They'd enjoyed each other's
society on the _Nemesis_. He wondered if she would want to make it
permanent, even on a throne....

Elaine was with him. He felt her beside him, almost tangibly. Her
voice was whispering to him: _She loves you, Lucas. She'll say yes.
Be good to her, and she'll make you happy._ Then she was gone, and
he knew that she would never return.

Good-by, Elaine.

_BOOKEND_



"There are incredible things still
undiscovered; most of the important installations were built in
duplicate as a precaution against space attack. I know where all of
them are.

"But I could find nothing, not one single word, about any giant
strategic planning computer called Merlin!"


Nevertheless the leading men of the planet didn't believe him. They
couldn't, for the search for Merlin had become their abiding
obsession. Merlin meant everything to them: power, pleasures, and
profits unlimited.

Conn had known they'd never believe him, and so he had a trick or two
up his space-trained sleeve that might outwit even their fabled Cosmic
Computer ... if they dared accept his challenge.

_H. BEAM PIPER_ is rather enigmatic where his personal statistics are
concerned. It may be stated that he lives in Williamsport,
Pennsylvania, that he is an expert on the history and use of hand
weapons, that he has been writing and selling science-fiction for many
years to the leading magazines, and that he is highly rated among
readers for his skill and imagination. He has had several novels
published, including mysteries and juveniles.

His previous appearances in Ace Books include two novels written in
collaboration with John J. McGuire: CRISIS IN 2140 (D-227) and A
PLANET FOR TEXANS (D-299), and a longer entirely self-authored novel
SPACE VIKING (F-225).

THE COSMIC COMPUTER

(Original Title: Junkyard Planet)

H. BEAM PIPER

ACE BOOKS, INC.

1120 Avenue of the Americas

New York, N.Y. 10036

THE COSMIC COMPUTER (JUNKYARD PLANET)


Copyright, 1963, by H. Beam Piper


An Ace Book, by arrangement with G. P. Putnam's Sons


All Rights Reserved


Printed in U.S.A.




I


Thirty minutes to Litchfield.

Conn Maxwell, at the armor-glass front of the observation deck,
watched the landscape rush out of the horizon and vanish beneath the
ship, ten thousand feet down. He thought he knew how an hourglass must
feel with the sand slowly draining out.

It had been six months to Litchfield when the _Mizar_ lifted out of La
Plata Spaceport and he watched Terra dwindle away. It had been two
months to Litchfield when he boarded the _City of Asgard_ at the port
of the same name on Odin. It had been two hours to Litchfield when the
_Countess Dorothy_ rose from the airship dock at Storisende. He had
had all that time, and now it was gone, and he was still unprepared
for what he must face at home.

Thirty minutes to Litchfield.

The words echoed in his mind as though he had spoken them aloud, and
then, realizing that he never addressed himself as sir, he turned. It
was the first mate.

He had a clipboard in his hand, and he was wearing a Terran Federation
Space Navy uniform of forty years, or about a dozen regulation-changes,
ago. Once Conn had taken that sort of thing for granted. Now it was
obtruding upon him everywhere.

"Thirty minutes to Litchfield, sir," the first officer repeated, and
gave him the clipboard to check the luggage list. Valises, two;
trunks, two; microbook case, one. The last item fanned a small flicker
of anger, not at any person, not even at himself, but at the whole
infernal situation. He nodded.

"That's everything. Not many passengers left aboard, are there?"

"You're the only one, first class, sir. About forty farm laborers on
the lower deck." He dismissed them as mere cargo. "Litchfield's the
end of the run."

"I know. I was born there."

The mate looked again at his name on the list and grinned.

"Sure; you're Rodney Maxwell's son. Your father's been giving us a lot
of freight lately. I guess I don't have to tell you about Litchfield."

"Maybe you do. I've been away for six years. Tell me, are they having
labor trouble now?"

"Labor trouble?" The mate was surprised. "You mean with the
farm-tramps? Ten of them for every job, if you call that trouble."

"Well, I noticed you have steel gratings over the gangway heads to the
lower deck, and all your crewmen are armed. Not just pistols, either."

"Oh. That's on account of pirates."

"Pirates?" Conn echoed.

"Well, I guess you'd call them that. A gang'll come aboard, dressed
like farm-tramps; they'll have tommy guns and sawed-off shotguns in
their bindles. When the ship's airborne and out of reach of help,
they'll break out their guns and take her. Usually kill all the crew
and passengers. They don't like to leave live witnesses," the mate
said. "You heard about the _Harriet Barne_, didn't you?"

She was Transcontinent & Overseas, the biggest contragravity ship on
the planet.

"They didn't pirate her, did they?"

The mate nodded. "Six months ago; Blackie Perales' gang. There was
just a tag end of a radio call, that ended in a shot. Time the Air
Patrol got to her estimated position it was too late. Nobody's ever
seen ship, officers, crew or passengers since."

"Well, great Ghu; isn't the Government doing anything about it?"

"Sure. They offered a big reward for the pirates, dead or alive. And
there hasn't been a single case of piracy inside the city limits of
Storisende," he added solemnly.

The Calder Range had grown to a sharp blue line on the horizon ahead,
and he could see the late afternoon sun on granite peaks. Below, the
fields were bare and brown, and the woods were autumn-tinted. They had
been green with new foliage when he had last seen them, and the
wine-melon fields had been in pink blossom. Must have gotten the crop
in early, on this side of the mountains. Maybe they were still
harvesting, over in the Gordon Valley. Or maybe this gang below was
going to the wine-pressing. Now that he thought of it, he'd seen a lot
of cask staves going aboard at Storisende.

Yet there seemed to be less land under cultivation now than six years
ago. He could see squares of bracken and low brush that had been melon
fields recently, among the new forests that had grown up in the past
forty years. The few stands of original timber towered above the
second growth like hills; those trees had been there when the planet
had been colonized.

That had been two hundred years ago, at the beginning of the Seventh
Century, Atomic Era. The name "Poictesme" told that--Surromanticist
Movement, when they were rediscovering James Branch Cabell. Old Genji
Gartner, the scholarly and half-piratical space-rover whose ship had
been the first to enter the Trisystem, had been devoted to the
romantic writers of the Pre-Atomic Era. He had named all the planets
of the Alpha System from the books of Cabell, and those of Beta from
Spenser's _Faerie Queene_, and those of Gamma from Rabelais. Of
course, the camp village at his first landing site on this one had
been called Storisende.

Thirty years later, Genji Gartner had died there, after seeing
Storisende grow to a metropolis and Poictesme become a Member Republic
in the Terran Federation. The other planets were uninhabitable except
in airtight dome cities, but they were rich in minerals. Companies had
been formed to exploit them. No food could be produced on any of them
except by carniculture and hydroponic farming, and it had been cheaper
to produce it naturally on Poictesme. So Poictesme had concentrated on
agriculture and had prospered. At least, for about a century.

Other colonial planets were developing their own industries; the
manufactured goods the Gartner Trisystem produced could no longer find
a profitable market. The mines and factories on Jurgen and Koshchei,
on Britomart and Calidore, on Panurge and the moons of Pantagruel
closed, and the factory workers went away. On Poictesme, the offices
emptied, the farms contracted, forests reclaimed fields, and the wild
game came back.

Coming toward the ship out of the east, now, was a vast desert of
crumbling concrete--landing fields and parade grounds, empty barracks
and toppling sheds, airship docks, stripped gun emplacements and
missile-launching sites. These were more recent, and dated from
Poictesme's second hectic prosperity, when the Gartner Trisystem had
been the advance base for the Third Fleet-Army Force, during the
System States War.

It had lasted twelve years. Millions of troops were stationed on or
routed through Poictesme. The mines and factories reopened for war
production. The Federation spent trillions on trillions of sols, piled
up mountains of supplies and equipment, left the face of the world
cluttered with installations. Then, without warning, the System States
Alliance collapsed, the rebellion ended, and the scourge of peace fell
on Poictesme.

The Federation armies departed. They took the clothes they stood in,
their personal weapons, and a few souvenirs. Everything else was
abandoned. Even the most expensive equipment had been worth less than
the cost of removal.

The people who had grown richest out of the War had followed, taking
their riches with them. For the next forty years, those who remained
had been living on leavings. On Terra, Conn had told his friends that
his father was a prospector, leaving them to interpret that as one who
searched, say, for uranium. Rodney Maxwell found quite a bit of
uranium, but he got it by taking apart the warheads of missiles.

Now he was looking down on the granite spines of the Calder Range;
ahead the misty Gordon Valley sloped and widened to the north. Twenty
minutes to Litchfield, now. He still didn't know what he was going to
tell the people who would be waiting for him. No; he knew that; he
just didn't know how. The ship swept on, ten miles a minute, tearing
through thin puffs of cloud. Ten minutes. The Big Bend was glistening
redly in the sunlit haze, but Litchfield was still hidden inside its
curve. Six. Four. The _Countess Dorothy_ was losing speed and
altitude. Now he could see it, first a blur and then distinctly. The
Airlines Building, so thick as to look squat for all its height. The
yellow block of the distilleries under their plume of steam. High
Garden Terrace; the Mall.

Moment by moment, the stigmata of decay became more evident. Terraces
empty or littered with rubbish; gardens untended and choked with wild
growth; blank-staring windows, walls splotched with lichens. At first,
he was horrified at what had happened to Litchfield in six years. Then
he realized that the change had been in himself. He was seeing it with
new eyes, as it really was.

The ship came in five hundred feet above the Mall, and he could see
cracked pavements sprouting grass, statues askew on their pedestals,
waterless fountains. At first he thought one of them was playing, but
what he had taken for spray was dust blowing from the empty basin.
There was a thing about dusty fountains, some poem he'd read at the
University.

_The fountains are dusty in the Graveyard of Dreams;
The hinges are rusty, they swing with tiny screams._

Was Poictesme a Graveyard of Dreams? No; Junkyard of Empire. The
Terran Federation had impoverished a hundred planets, devastated a
score, actually depopulated at least three, to keep the System States
Alliance from seceding. It hadn't been a victory. It had only been a
lesser defeat.

There was a crowd, almost a mob, on the dock; nearly everybody in
topside Litchfield. He spotted old Colonel Zareff, with his white hair
and plum-brown skin, and Tom Brangwyn, the town marshal, red-faced and
bulking above everybody else. Kurt Fawzi, the mayor, well to the
front. Then he saw his father and mother, and his sister Flora, and
waved to them. They waved back, and then everybody was waving. The
gangway-port opened, and the Academy band struck up, enthusiastically
if inexpertly, as he descended to the dock.

His father was wearing a black suit with a long coat, cut to the same
pattern as the one he had worn six years ago. Blackout curtain cloth.
It was fairly new, but the coat had begun to acquire a permanent
wrinkle across the right hip, over the pistol butt. His mother's dress
was new, and so was Flora's, made for the occasion. He couldn't be
sure just which of the Federation Armed Forces had provided the
material, but his father's shirt was Med Service sterilon.

Ashamed to be noticing things like that, he clasped his father's hand,
kissed his mother, embraced his sister. There were a few, but very
few, gray threads in his father's mustache; a few more squint-wrinkles
around the eyes. His mother's hair was all gray, now, and she was
heavier. She seemed shorter, but that would be because he'd grown a
few inches in the last six years. For a moment, he was surprised that
Flora actually looked younger. Then he realized that to seventeen,
twenty-three is practically middle age, but to twenty-three,
twenty-nine is almost contemporary. He noticed the glint on her left
hand and caught it to look at the ring.

"Hey! Zarathustra sunstone! Nice," he said. "Where is he, Sis?"

He'd never met her fiance; Wade Lucas hadn't come to Litchfield to
practice medicine until the year after he'd gone to Terra.

"Oh, emergency," Flora said. "Obstetrical case; that won't wait on
anything. In Tramptown, of course. But he'll be at the party.... Oops,
I shouldn't have said that; that's supposed to be a surprise."

"Don't worry; I'll be surprised," he promised.

Then Kurt Fawzi was pushing forward, holding out his hand. Thinner,
and grayer, but just as effusive as ever.

"Welcome home, Conn. Judge, shake hands with him and tell him how glad
we all are to see him back.... Now, Franz, put away the recorder; save
the interview for the _Chronicle_ till later. Ah, Professor Kellton;
one pupil Litchfield Academy can be proud of!"

He shook hands with them: Judge Ledue, Franz Veltrin, old Professor
Dolf Kellton. They were all happy; how much, he wondered, because he
was Conn Maxwell, Rodney Maxwell's son, home from Terra, and how much
because of what they hoped he'd tell them. Kurt Fawzi, edging him
aside, was the first to speak of it.

"Conn, what did you find out?" he whispered. "Do you know where it
is?"

He stammered, then saw Tom Brangwyn and Colonel Klem Zareff
approaching, the older man tottering on a silver-headed cane and the
younger keeping pace with him. Neither of them had been born on
Poictesme. Tom Brangwyn had always been reticent about where he came
from, but Hathor was a good guess. There had been political trouble on
Hathor twenty years ago; the losers had had to get off-planet in a
hurry to dodge firing squads. Klem Zareff never was reticent about his
past. He came from Ashmodai, one of the System States planets, and he
had commanded a regiment, and finally a division that had been blasted
down to less than regimental strength, in the Alliance Army. He always
wore a little rosette of System States black and green on his coat.

"Hello, boy," he croaked, extending a hand. "Good to see you again."

"It sure is, Conn," the town marshal agreed, then lowered his voice.
"Find out anything definite?"

"We didn't have much time, Conn," Kurt Fawzi said, "but we've
arranged a little celebration for you. We'll start it with a dinner at
Senta's."

"You couldn't have done anything I'd have liked better, Mr. Fawzi. I'd
have to have a meal at Senta's before I'd really feel at home."

"Well, it'll be a couple of hours. Suppose we all go up to my office,
in the meantime. Give the ladies a chance to fix up for the party, and
have a little drink and a talk together."

"You want to do that, Conn?" his father asked. There was an odd
undernote of anxiety, or reluctance, in his voice.

"Yes, of course. I'd like that."

His father turned to speak to his mother and Flora. Kurt Fawzi was
speaking to his wife, interrupting himself to shout instructions to
some laborers who were bringing up a contragravity skid. Conn turned
to Colonel Zareff.

"Good melon crop this year?" he asked.

The old Rebel cursed. "Gehenna of a big crop; we're up to our necks in
melons. This time next year we'll be washing our feet in brandy."

"Hold onto it and age it; you ought to see what they charge for a
drink of Poictesme brandy on Terra."

"This isn't Terra, and we aren't selling it by the drink," Colonel
Zareff said. "We're selling it at Storisende Spaceport, for what the
freighter captains pay us. You've been away too long, Conn. You've
forgotten what it's like to live in a poor-house."

The cargo was coming off, now. Cask staves, and more cask staves.
Zareff swore bitterly at the sight, and then they started toward the
wide doors of the shipping floor, inside the Airlines Building.
Outgoing cargo was beginning to come out; casks of brandy, of course,
and a lot of boxes and crates, painted light blue and bearing the
yellow trefoil of the Third Fleet-Army Force and the eight-pointed red
star of Ordnance. Cases of rifles; square boxes of ammunition; crated
auto-cannon. Conn turned to his father.

"This our stuff?" he asked. "Where did you dig it?"

Rodney Maxwell laughed. "You know the old Tenth Army Headquarters,
over back of Snagtooth, in the Calders? Everybody knows that was
cleaned out years ago. Well, always take a second look at these
things everybody knows. Ten to one they're not so. It always bothered
me that nobody found any underground attack-shelters. I took a second
look, and sure enough, I found them, right underneath, mined out of
the solid rock. Conn, you'd be surprised at what I found there."

"Where are you going to sell that stuff?" he asked, pointing at a
passing skid. "There's enough combat equipment around now to outfit a
private army for every man, woman and child in Poictesme."

"Storisende Spaceport. The freighter captains buy it, and sell it on
some of the planets that were colonized right before the War and
haven't gotten industrialized yet. I'm clearing about two hundred sols
a ton on it."

The skid at which he had pointed was loaded with cases of M504
submachine guns. Even used, one was worth fifty sols. Allowing for
packing weight, his father was selling those tommy guns for less than
a good cafe on Terra got for one drink of Poictesme brandy.




II


He had been in Kurt Fawzi's office before, once or twice, with his
father; he remembered it as a dim, quiet place of genteel conviviality
and rambling conversation. None of the lights were bright, and the
walls were almost invisible in the shadows. As they entered, Tom
Brangwyn went to the long table and took off his belt and holster,
laying it down. One by one, the others unbuckled their weapons and
added them to the pile. Klem Zareff's cane went on the table with his
pistol; there was a sword inside it.

That was something else he was seeing with new eyes. He hadn't started
carrying a gun when he had left for Terra, and he was wondering, now,
why any of them bothered to. Why, there wouldn't be a shooting a year
in Litchfield, if you didn't count the Tramptowners, and they stayed
south of the docks and off the top level.

Or perhaps that was just it. Litchfield was peaceful because
everybody was prepared to keep it that way. It certainly wasn't
because of anything the Planetary Government did to maintain order.

Now Brangwyn was setting out glasses, filling a pitcher from a keg in
the corner of the room. The last time Conn had been here, they'd given
him a glass of wine, and he'd felt very grown-up because they didn't
water it for him.

"Well, gentlemen," Kurt Fawzi was saying, "let's have a toast to our
returned friend and new associate. Conn, we're all anxious to hear
what you've found out, but even if you didn't learn anything, we're
still happy to have you back with us. Gentlemen; to our friend and
neighbor. Welcome home, Conn!"

"Well, it's wonderful to be back, Mr. Fawzi," he began.

"Here, none of this mister foolishness; you're one of us, now, Conn.
And drink up, everybody. We have plenty of brandy, if we don't have
anything else."

"You can say that again, Kurt." That was one of the distillery people;
he'd remember the name in a moment. "When this new crop gets pressed
and fermented...."

"I don't know where in Gehenna I'm going to vat mine till it
ferments," Klem Zareff said.

"Or why," another planter added. "Lorenzo, what are you going to be
paying for wine?"

Lorenzo Menardes; that was the name. The distiller said he was
worrying about what he'd be able to get for brandy.

"Oh, please," Fawzi interrupted. "Not today; not when our boy's home
and is going to tell us how we can solve all our problems."

"Yes, Conn." That was Morgan Gatworth, the lawyer. "You did find out
where Merlin is, didn't you?"

That set them all off. He was still holding his drink; he downed it in
one gulp, barely tasting it, and handed the glass to Tom Brangwyn for
a refill, and caught a frown on his father's face. One did not gulp
drinks in Kurt Fawzi's office.

Well, neither did one blast everybody's hopes with half a dozen words,
and that was what he was trying to force himself to do. He wanted to
blurt out the one quick sentence and get it over with, but the words
wouldn't come out of his throat. He lowered the second drink by half;
the brandy was beginning to warm him and dissolve the cold lump in his
stomach. Have to go easy, though. He wasn't used to this kind of
drinking, and he wanted to stay sober enough to talk sense until he'd
told them what he had to.

"I hope," he said, "that you don't expect me to show you the cross on
the map, where the computer is buried."

All the eyes around him began to look troubled. Most of them had been
expecting precisely that. His father was watching him anxiously.

"But it's still here on Poictesme, isn't it?" one of the melon
planters asked. "They didn't take it away with them?"

"Most of you gentlemen," he said, "contributed to sending me to school
on Terra, to study cybernetics and computer theory. It wouldn't do us
any good to find Merlin if none of us could operate it. Well, I've
done that. I can use any known type of computer, and train assistants.
After I graduated, I was offered a junior instructorship to computer
physics at the University."

"You didn't mention that, son," his father said.

"The letter would have come on the same ship I did. Besides, I didn't
think it was very important."

"I think it is." There was a catch in old Dolf Kellton's voice. "One
of my boys from the Academy offered a place on the faculty of the
University of Montevideo, on Terra!" He finished his drink and held
out his glass for more, something he almost never did.

"Conn means," Kurt Fawzi explained, "that it had nothing to do with
Merlin."

All right; now tell them the truth.

"I was also to find out anything I could about a secret giant computer
used during the War by the Third Fleet-Army Force, code-named Merlin.
I went over all the records available to the public; I used your
letter, Professor, and the head of our Modern History department
secured me access to non-public material, some of it still classified.
For one thing, I have locations and maps and plans of every Federation
installation built here between 842 and 854, the whole period of the
War." He turned to his father. "There are incredible things still
undiscovered; most of the important installations were built in
duplicate, sometimes triplicate, as a precaution against space attack.
I know where all of them are."

"Space attack!" Klem Zareff was indignant. "There never was a time we
could have attacked Poictesme. Even if we'd had the ships, we were
fighting a purely defensive war. Aggression was no part of our
policy--"

He interrupted: "Excuse me, Colonel. The point I was trying to make is
that, with all I was able to learn, I could find nothing, not one
single word, about any giant strategic planning computer called
Merlin, or any Merlin Project."

There! He'd gotten that out. Now go on and tell them about the old man
in the dome-house on Luna. The room was silent, except for the small
insectile hum of the electric clock. Then somebody set a glass on the
table, and it sounded like a hammer blow.

"Nothing, Conn?"

Kurt Fawzi was incredulous. Judge Ledue's hand shook as though palsied
as he tried to relight his cigar. Dolf Kellton was looking at the
drink in his hand as though he had no idea what it was. The others
found their voices, one by one.

"Of course, it was the most closely guarded secret ..."

"But after forty years ..."

"Hah, don't tell me about security!" Colonel Zareff barked. "You
should have seen the lengths our staff went to. I remember, once, on
Mephistopheles ..."

"But there _was_ a computer code-named Merlin," Judge Ledue was
insisting, to convince himself more than anybody else. "Its
memory-bank contained all human knowledge. It was capable of scanning
all its data instantaneously, and combining, and forming associations,
and reasoning with absolute accuracy, and extrapolating to produce new
facts, and predicting future events, and ..."

And if you'd asked such a computer, "Is there a God?" it would have
simply answered, "Present."

"We'd have won the War, except for Merlin," Zareff was declaring.

"Conn, from what you've learned of computers generally, how big would
Merlin have to be?" old Professor Kellton asked.

"Well, the astrophysics computer at the University occupied a volume
of a hundred thousand cubic feet. For all Merlin was supposed to do,
I'd say something of the order of three million to five million.

"Well, it's a cinch they didn't haul that away with them," Lester
Dawes, the banker, said.

"Oh, lots of places on Poictesme where they could have hid a thing
like that," Tom Brangwyn said. "You know, a planet's a mighty big
place."

"It doesn't have to be on Poictesme, even," Morgan Gatworth pointed
out. "It could be anywhere in the Trisystem."

"You know where I'd have put it?" Lorenzo Menardes asked. "On one of
the moons of Pantagruel."

"But that's in the Gamma System, three light years away," Kurt Fawzi
objected. "There isn't a hypership on this planet, and it would take
half a lifetime to get there on normal-space drive."

Conn was lifting his glass to his lips. He set it down again and rose
to his feet.

"Then," he said, "we will build a hypership. On Koshchei there are
shipyards and hyperdrive engines and everything we will need. We only
need one normal-space interplanetary ship to get out there, and we're
in business."

"Well, I don't know we need one," Judge Ledue said. "That was only an
idea of Lorenzo's. I think Merlin's right here on Poictesme."

"We don't know it is," Conn replied. "And we don't know we won't need
a ship. Merlin may be on Koshchei; that's where the components would
be fabricated, and the Armed Forces weren't hauling anything any
farther than they had to. Koshchei's only two and a half minutes away
by radio; that's practically in the next room. Look; here's how they
could have done it."

He went on talking, about remote controls and radio transmission and
positronic brains and neutrino-circuits. They believed it all, even
the little they understood. They would believe anything he told them
about Merlin--except the truth.

"But this will take money," Lester Dawes said. "And after that
infernal deluge of unsecured paper currency thirty years ago ..."

"I have no doubt," Judge Ledue began, "that the Planetary Government
at Storisende would give assistance. I have some slight influence with
President Vyckhoven ..."

"Huh-_uh_!" That was one of Klem Zareff's fellow planters. "We don't
want Jake Vyckhoven or any of this First-Families-of-Storisende
oligarchy in this at all. That's the gang that bankrupted the
Government with doles and work relief, and everybody else with
worthless printing-press money after the War, and they've been
squatting in a circle deploring things ever since. Some of these days
Blackie Perales and his pirates'll sack Storisende, for all they'd be
able to do to stop him."

"We get a ship out to Koshchei, and the next thing you know we'll be
the Planetary Government," Tom Brangwyn said.

Rodney Maxwell finished the brandy in his glass and set it on the
table, then went to the pile of belts and holsters and began rummaging
for his own. Kurt Fawzi looked up in surprise.

"Rod, you're not leaving are you?" he asked.

"Yes. It's only half an hour till time for dinner, and I think Conn
and I ought to have a little fresh air. Besides, you know, we haven't
seen each other for six years." He buckled on the heavy automatic and
settled the belt over his hips. "You didn't have a gun, did you,
Conn?" he asked. "Well, let's go."




III


It wasn't until they were down to the main level and outside in the
little plaza to the east of the Airlines Building that his father
broke the silence.

"That was quite a talk you gave them, Conn. They believed every word
of it. I even caught myself starting to believe it once or twice."

Conn stopped short; his father halted beside him. "Why didn't you tell
them the truth, son?" Rodney Maxwell asked.

The question, which he had been throwing at himself, angered him. "Why
didn't I just grab a couple of pistols and shoot the lot of them?" he
retorted. "It wouldn't have killed them any deader, and it wouldn't
have hurt as much."

"There is no Merlin. Is that it?"

He realized, suddenly, that his father had known, or suspected that
all along. He started to say something, then checked himself and began
again:

"There never was one. I was going to tell them, but you saw them. I
couldn't."

"You're sure of it?"

"The whole thing's a myth. I'm quoting the one man in the Galaxy who
ought to know. The man who commanded the Third Force here during the
War."

"Foxx Travis!" His father's voice was soft with wonder. "I saw him
once, when I was eight years old. I thought he'd died long ago. Why,
he must be over a hundred."

"A hundred and twelve. He's living on Luna; low gravity's all that
keeps him alive."

"And you talked to him?"

"Yes."

There'd been a girl in his third-year biophysics class; he'd found out
that she was a great-granddaughter of Force General Travis. It had
taken him until his senior midterm vacation to wangle an invitation to
the dome-house on Luna. After that, it had been easy. As soon as Foxx
Travis had learned that one of his great-granddaughter's guests was
from Poictesme, he had insisted on talking to him.

"What did he tell you?"

The old man had been incredibly thin and frail. Under normal
gravitation, his life would have gone out like a blown match. Even at
one-sixth G, it had cost him effort to rise and greet the guest. There
had been a younger man, a mere stripling of seventy-odd; he had been
worried, and excused himself at once. Travis had laughed after he had
gone out.

"Mike Shanlee; my aide-de-camp on Poictesme. Now he thinks he's my
keeper. He'll have a squad of doctors and a platoon of nurses in here
as soon as you're gone, so take your time. Now, tell me how things are
on Poictesme...."

"Just about that," he told his father. "I finally mentioned Merlin, as
an old legend people still talked about. I was ashamed to admit
anybody really believed in it. He laughed, and said, 'Great Ghu, is
that thing still around? Well, I suppose so; it was all through the
Third Force during the War. Lord only knows how these rumors start
among troops. We never contradicted it; it was good for morale.'"

They had started walking again, and were out on the Mall; the sky was
flaming red and orange from high cirrus clouds in the sunset light.
They stopped by a dry fountain, perhaps the one from which he had seen
the dust blowing. Rodney Maxwell sat down on the edge of the basin and
got out two cigars, handing one to Conn, who produced his lighter.

"Conn, they wouldn't have believed you _and_ Foxx Travis," he said.
"Merlin's a religion with those people. Merlin's a robot god,
something they can shove all their problems onto. As soon as they find
Merlin, everybody will be rich and happy, the Government bonds will be
redeemed at face value plus interest, the paper money'll be worth a
hundred Federation centisols to the sol, and the leaves and wastepaper
will be raked off the Mall, all by magic." He muttered an
unprintability and laughed bitterly.

"I didn't know you were the village atheist, Father."

"In a religious community, the village atheist keeps his doubts to
himself. I have to do business with these Merlinolators. It's all I
can do to keep Flora from antagonizing them at school."

Flora was a teacher; now she was assistant principal of the grade
schools. Professor Kellton was also school superintendent. He could
see how that would be.

"Flora's not a True Believer, then?"

Rodney Maxwell shook his head. "That's largely Wade Lucas's influence,
I'd say. You know about him."

Just from letters. Wade Lucas was from Baldur; he'd gone off-planet
as soon as he'd gotten his M.D. Evidently the professional situation
there was the same as on Terra; plenty of opportunities, and fifty
competitors for each one. On Poictesme, there were few opportunities,
but nobody competed for anything, not even to find Merlin.

"He'd never heard of Merlin till he came here, and when he did, he
just couldn't believe in it. I don't blame him. I've heard about it
all my life, and I can't."

"Why not?"

"To begin with, I suppose, because it's just another of these things
everybody believes. Then, I've had to do some studying on the Third
Force occupation of Poictesme to know where to go and dig, and I never
found any official, or even reliably unofficial, mention of anything
of the sort. Forty years is a long time to keep a secret, you know.
And I can't see why they didn't come back for it after the pressure to
get the troops home was off, or why they didn't build a dozen Merlins.
This isn't the only planet that has problems they can't solve for
themselves."

"What's Mother's attitude on Merlin?"

"She's against it. She thinks it isn't right to make machines that are
smarter than people."

"I'll agree. It's scientifically impossible."

"That's what I've been trying to tell her. Conn, I noticed that after
Kurt Fawzi started talking about how long it would take to get to the
Gamma System, you jumped right into it and began talking up a ship.
Did you think that if you got them started on that it would take their
minds off Merlin?"

"That gang up in Fawzi's office? Nifflheim, no! They'll go on hunting
Merlin till they die. But I was serious about the ship. An idea hit
me. You gave it to me; you and Klem Zareff."

"Why, I didn't say a word ..."

"Down on the shipping floor, before we went up. You were talking about
selling arms and ammunition at a profit of two hundred sols a ton, and
Klem was talking as though a bumper crop was worse than a Green Death
epidemic. If we had a hypership, look what we could do. How much do
you think a settler on Hoth or Malebolge or Irminsul would pay for a
good rifle and a thousand rounds? How much would he pay for his
life?--that's what it would come to. And do you know what a fifteen-cc
liqueur glass of Poictesme brandy sells for on Terra? One sol;
Federation money. I'll admit it costs like Nifflheim to run a
hypership, but look at the difference between what these tramp
freighter captains pay at Storisende and what they get."

"I've been looking at it for a long time. Maybe if we had a few ships
of our own, these planters would be breaking new ground instead of
cutting their plantings, and maybe we'd get some money on this planet
that was worth something. You have a good idea there, son. But maybe
there's an angle to it you haven't thought of."

Conn puffed slowly at the cigar. Why couldn't they grow tobacco like
this on Terra? Soil chemicals, he supposed; that wasn't his subject.

"You can't put this scheme over on its own merits. This gang wouldn't
lift a finger to build a hypership. They've completely lost hope in
everything but Merlin."

"Well, can do. I'll even convince them that Merlin's a space-station,
in orbit off Koshchei. I think I could do that."

"You know what it'll cost? If you go ahead with it, I'm in it with
you, make no mistake about that. But you and I will be the only two
people on Poictesme who can be trusted with the truth. We'll have to
lie to everybody else, with every word we speak. We'll have to lie to
Flora, and we'll have to lie to your mother. Your mother most of all.
She believes in absolutes. Lying is absolutely wrong, no matter whom
it helps; telling the truth is absolutely right, no matter how much
damage it does or how many hearts it breaks. You think this is going
to be worth a price like that?"

"Don't you?" he demanded, and then pointed along the crumbling and
littered Mall. "Look at that. Pretend you never saw it before and are
looking at it for the first time. And then tell me whether it'll be
worth it or not."

His father took a cigar from his mouth. For a moment, he sat staring
silently.

"Great Ghu!" Rodney Maxwell turned. "I wonder how that sneaked up on
me; I honestly never realized.... Yes, Conn. This is a cause worth
lying for." He looked at his watch. "We ought to be starting for
Senta's, but let's take a few minutes and talk this over. How are you
going to get it started?"

"Well, convince them that I can find Merlin and that they can't find
it without me. I think I've done that already. Then convince them that
we'll have to have a ship to get to Koshchei, and--"

"Won't do. That'll take money, and money's something none of this gang
has."

"You heard me talk about the stuff I found out on Terra? Father, you
have no idea what all there is. You remember the old Force Command
Headquarters, the one the Planetary Government took over? I know where
there's a duplicate of that, completely underground. It has everything
the other one had, and a lot more, because it'll be cram-full of
supplies to be used in case of a general blitz that would knock out
everything on the planet. And a chain of hospitals. And a spaceport,
over on Barathrum, that was built inside the crater of an extinct
volcano. There won't be any hyperships there of course, but there'll
be equipment and material. We might be able to build a ship there. And
supply depots, all over the planet; none of them has ever been opened
since the War. Don't worry about financing; we have that."

His father, he could see, appreciated what he had brought home from
Terra. He was nodding, with quick head jerks, at each item.

"That'll do it, all right. Now, listen; what we want to do is get a
company organized, a regular limited-liability company, with a
charter. We'll contribute the information you brought back from Terra,
and we'll get the rest of this gang to put all the money we can twist
out of them into it, so we'll be sure they won't say, 'Aw, Nifflheim
with it!' and walk out on us as soon as the going gets a little
tough." Rodney Maxwell got to his feet, hitching his gun-belt. "I'll
pass the word to Kurt to get a meeting set up for tomorrow afternoon."

"What'll we call this company? Merlin Rediscovery, Ltd?"

"No! We keep Merlin out of it. As far as the public is supposed to
know, this is just a war-material prospecting company. I'll impress on
them that Merlin is to be kept a secret. That way, we'll have to
engage in regular prospecting and salvage work as a front. I'll see to
it that the front is also the main objective." He nodded down the
Mall, toward the sunset, which was blazing even higher and redder.
"Well, let's go. You don't want to be late for your own welcome-home
party."

They walked slowly, still talking, until they came to the end of the
Mall. The escalators to the level below weren't working. Now that he
thought of it, they hadn't been when he had gone away, six years ago,
but he could remember riding up and down on them as a small child. For
a moment they stood in the sunset light, looking down on the lower
terrace as they finished their cigars.

Senta's was mostly outdoors, the tables under the open sky. The people
gathered below were looking at the sunset, too; Litchfielders loved to
watch sunsets, maybe because a sunset was one of the few things
economic conditions couldn't affect. There was Kurt Fawzi, the center
of a group to whom he was declaiming earnestly; there was his mother,
and Flora, and Flora's fiance, who was the uncomfortable lone man in
an excited feminine flock. And there was Senta herself, short and
dumpy, in one of her preposterous red and purple dresses, bubbling
happily one moment and screaming invective at some laggard waiter the
next.

They threw away their cigars and started down the long, motionless
escalator. Conn Maxwell, Hero of the Hour, marching to Destiny. He
seemed to hear trumpets sounding before him.

And an occasional muted Bronx cheer.




IV


The alarm chimed softly beside his bed; he reached out and silenced
it, and lay looking at the early sunlight in the windows, and found
that he was wishing himself back in his dorm room at the University.
No, back in this room, ten years ago, before any of this had started.
For a while, he imagined himself thirteen years old and knowing
everything he knew now, and he began mapping a campaign to establish
himself as Litchfield's Juvenile Delinquent Number One, to the end
that Kurt Fawzi and Dolf Kellton and the rest of them would never
dream of sending him to school on Terra to find out where Merlin was.

But he couldn't even go back to yesterday afternoon in Kurt Fawzi's
office and tell them the truth. All he could do was go ahead. It had
seemed so easy, when he and his father had been talking on the Mall;
just get a ship built, and get out to Koshchei, and open some of the
shipyards and engine works there, and build a hypership. Sure;
easy--once he got started.

He climbed out of bed, knuckled the sleep-sand out of his eyes, threw
his robe around him, and started across the room to the bath cubicle.

They had decided to have breakfast together his first morning home.
The party had broken up late, and then there had been the excitement
of opening the presents he had brought back from Terra. Nobody had had
a chance to talk about Merlin, or about what he was going to do, now
that he was home. That, and his career of mendacity, would start at
breakfast. He wanted to let his father get to the table first, to run
interference for him; he took his time with his toilet and dressed
carefully and slowly. Finally, he zipped up the short waist-length
jacket and went out.

His father and mother and Flora were at the table, and the
serving-robot was floating around a few inches off the floor, steam
trailing from its coffee urn and its tray lid up to offer food. He
greeted everybody and sat down at his place, and the robot came around
to him. His mother had selected all the things he'd been most fond of
six years ago: shovel-snout bacon, hotcakes, starberry jam, things he
hadn't tasted since he had gone away. He filled his plate and poured a
cup of coffee.

"You don't want to bother coming out to the dig with me this morning,
do you?" his father was saying. "I'll be back here for lunch, and
we'll go to the meeting in the afternoon."

"Meeting?" Flora asked. "What meeting?"

"Oh, we didn't have time to tell you," Rodney Maxwell said. "You know,
Conn brought back a lot of information on locations of supply depots
and things like that. An amazing list of things that haven't been
discovered yet. It's going to be too much for us to handle alone;
we're organizing a company to do it. We'll need a lot of labor, for
one thing; jobs for some of these Tramptowners."

"That's going to be something awfully big," his mother said dubiously.
"You never did anything like that before."

"I never had the kind of a partner I have now. It's Maxwell & Son,
from now on."

"Who's going to be in this company?" Flora wanted to know.

"Oh, everybody around town; Kurt and the Judge and Klem, and Lester
Dawes. All that crowd."

"The Fawzis' Office Gang," Flora said disparagingly. "I suppose
they'll want Conn to take them right to where Merlin is, the first
thing."

"Well, not the first thing," Conn said. "Merlin was one thing I
couldn't find out anything about on Terra."

"I'll bet you couldn't!"

"The people at Armed Forces Records would let me look at everything
else, and make microcopies and all, but not one word about computers.
Forty years, and they still have the security lid welded shut on
that."

Flora looked at him in shocked surprise. "You don't mean to tell me
you believe in that thing?"

"Sure. How do you think they fought a war around a perimeter of close
to a thousand light-years? They couldn't do all that out of their
heads. They'd have to have computers, and the one they'd use to
correlate everything and work out grand-strategy plans would have to
be a dilly. Why, I'd give anything just to look at the operating
panels for that thing."

"But that's just a silly story; there never was anything like Merlin.
No wonder you couldn't find out about it. You were looking for
something that doesn't exist, just like all these old cranks that sit
around drinking brandy and mooning about what Merlin's going to do
for them, and never doing anything for themselves."

"Oh, they're going to do something, now, Flora," his father told her.
"When we get this company organized--"

"You'll dig up a lot of stuff you won't be able to sell, like that
stuff you've been bringing in from Tenth Army, and then you'll go
looping off chasing Merlin, like the rest of them. Well, maybe that'll
be a little better than just sitting in Kurt Fawzi's office talking
about it, but not much."

It kept on like that. Conn and his father tried several times to
change the subject; each time Flora ignored the effort and returned to
her diatribe. Finally, she put her plate and cup on the robot's tray
and got to her feet.

"I have to go," she said. "Maybe I can do something to keep some of
these children from growing up to be Merlin-worshipers like their
parents."

She flung out of the room angrily. Mrs. Maxwell looked after her in
distress.

"And I thought it was going to be so nice, having breakfast together
again," she lamented.

Somehow the breakfast wasn't quite as good as he'd thought it was at
first. He wondered how many more breakfasts like that he was going to
have to sit through. He and his father finished quickly and got up,
while his mother started the robot to clearing the table.

"Conn," she said, after his father had gone out, "you shouldn't have
gotten Flora started like that."

"I didn't get Flora started; she's equipped with a self-starter. If
she doesn't believe in Merlin, that's her business. A lot of these
people do, and I'm going to help them hunt for it. That's why they all
chipped in to send me to school on Terra; remember?"

"Yes, I know." Her voice was heavy with distress. "Conn, do you really
believe there is a ... that thing?" she asked.

"Why, of course." He was mildly surprised at how sincerely and
straightforwardly he said it. "I don't know where it is, but it's
somewhere on Poictesme, or in the Alpha System."

"Well, do you think it would be a good thing to find it?"

That surprised him. Everybody knew it would be, and his mother didn't
share his father's attitude about things everybody knew. She hadn't
any business questioning a fundamental postulate like that.

"It frightens me," she continued. "I don't even like to think about
it. A soulless intelligence; it seems evil to me."

"Well, of course it's soulless. It's a machine, isn't it? An aircar's
soulless, but you're not afraid to ride in one."

"But this is different. A machine that can think. Conn, people weren't
meant to make machines like that, wiser than they are."

"Now wait a minute, Mother. You're talking to a computerman now."
Professional authority was something his mother oughtn't to question.
"A computer like Merlin isn't intelligent, or wise, or anything of the
sort. It doesn't think; the people who make computers and use them do
the thinking. A computer's a tool, like a screwdriver; it has to have
a man to use it."

"Well, but...."

"And please, don't talk about what people are _meant_ to do. People
aren't _meant_ to do things; they _mean_ to do things, and nine times
out of ten, they end by doing them. It may take a hundred thousand
years from a Stone Age savage in a cave to the captain of a hyperspace
ship, but sooner or later they get there."

His mother was silent. The soulless machine that had been clearing the
table floated out of the room, the dishwasher in its rectangular belly
gurgling. Maybe what he had told her was logical, but women aren't
impressed by logic. She knew better--for the good old feminine reason,
_Because_.

"Wade Lucas wanted me to drop in on him for a checkup," he mentioned.
"That's rubbish; I had one for my landing pratique on the ship. He
just wants to size up his future brother-in-law."

"Well, you ought to go see him."

"How did Flora come to meet him, anyhow?"

"Well, you know, he came from Baldur. He was in Storisende, looking
for an opening to start a practice, and he heard about some medical
equipment your father had found somewhere and came out to see if he
could buy it. Your father and Judge Ledue and Mr. Fawzi talked him
into opening his office here. Then he and Flora got acquainted...."
She asked, anxiously: "What did you think of him, Conn?"

"Seems like a regular guy. I think I'll like him." A husband like Wade
Lucas might be a good thing for Flora. "I'll drop in on him, sometime
this morning."

His mother went toward the rear of the house--more soulless machines,
like the housecleaning-robot, and the laundry-robot, to look after. He
went into his father's office and found the cigar humidor, just where
it had been when he'd stolen cigars out of it six years ago and
thought his father never suspected what he was doing.

Now, why didn't they export this tobacco? It was better than anything
they grew on Terra; well, at least it was different, just as Poictesme
brandy was different from Terran bourbon or Baldur honey-rum. That was
the sort of thing that could be sold in interstellar trade anytime and
anywhere; the luxury goods that were unique. Staple foodstuffs,
utility textiles, metal products, could be produced anywhere, and
sooner or later they were. That was the reason for the original,
pre-War depression: the customers were all producing for themselves.
He'd talk that over with his father. He wished he'd had time to take
some economics at the University.

He found the file his father kept up-to-date on salvage sites found
and registered with the Claims Office in Storisende. Some of the
locations he had brought back data for had been discovered, but, to
his relief, not the underground duplicate Force Command Headquarters,
and not the spaceport on the island continent of Barathrum, to the
east. That was all right.

He went to the house-defense arms closet and found a 10-mm Navy
pistol, and a belt and spare clips. Making sure that the pistol and
magazines were loaded, he buckled it on. He debated getting a vehicle
out of the hangar on the landing stage, decided against it, and
started downtown on foot.

One of the first people he met was Len Yeniguchi, the tailor. He would
be at the meeting that afternoon. He managed, while talking, to
comment on the cut of Conn's suit, and finger the material.

"Ah, nice," he complimented. "Made on Terra? We don't see cloth like
that here very often."

He meant it wasn't Armed Forces salvage.

"Father ought to be around to see you with a bolt of material, to have
a suit made," he said. "For Ghu's sake, either talk him into having a
short jacket like this, or get him to buy himself a shoulder holster.
He's ruined every coat he ever owned, carrying a gun on his hip."

A little farther on, he came to a combat car grounded in the middle of
the street. It was green, with black trimmings, and lettered in black,
GORDON VALLEY HOME GUARD. Tom Brangwyn was standing beside
it, talking to a young man in a green uniform.

"Hello, Conn." The town marshal looked at his hip and grinned. "See
you got all your clothes on this morning. You were just plain
indecent, yesterday.... You know Fred Karski, don't you?"

Yes, now that Tom mentioned it, he did. He and Fred had gone to school
together at the Litchfield Academy. But the six years since they'd
seen each other last had made a lot of difference in both of them. He
was beginning to think that the only strangers in Litchfield were his
own contemporaries. They shook hands, and Conn looked at the combat
car and Fred Karski's uniform.

"What's going on?" he asked. "The System States Alliance to business
again?"

Karski laughed. "Oh, that's the Colonel's idea. Green and black were
his colors in the War, and he's in command of the regiment."

"Regiment? You need a whole regiment?" Conn asked.

"Well, it's two companies, each about the size of a regular army
platoon, but we have to call it a regiment so he can keep his old
Rebel Army rank."

"We could use a regiment, Conn," Tom Brangwyn said seriously. "You
have no idea how bad things have gotten. Over on the east coast, the
outlaws are looting whole towns. About four months ago, they sacked
Waterville; burned the whole town and killed close to a hundred
people. That was Blackie Perales' gang."

"Who is this Blackie Perales? I heard the name mentioned in connection
with the _Harriet Barne_."

"Blackie Perales is anybody the Planetary Government can't catch,
which means practically any outlaw," Fred Karski said.

"No, Fred; there is a Blackie Perales," Tom Brangwyn said. "He used to
be a planter, down in the south. The banks foreclosed on him when he
couldn't pay his notes, and he turned outlaw. That's the way it's
going, all around. Every time a planter loses his plantation or a
farmer loses his farm, or a mechanic loses his job, he turns outlaw.
Take Tramptown, here. We used to plant nothing but melons. Then, when
the sale for wine and brandy dropped, the melon-planters began cutting
their melon crops and raising produce, instead of buying it from up
north, and turning land into pasture for cattle. The people we used to
buy foodstuffs from couldn't sell all they raised, and that threw a
lot of farmhands out of work. So they got the idea there was work
here, and they came flocking in, and when they couldn't get jobs, they
just stayed in Tramptown, stealing anything they could. We don't even
try to police Tramptown any more; we just see to it they don't come up
here."

"Well, where do these outlaws and pirates who are looting whole towns
come from?"

"Down in the Badlands, mostly. None of them have been bothering us,
since we organized the Home Guard. They tried to, a couple of times,
at first. There may have been a few survivors; they spread it around
that Gordon Valley wasn't any outlaws' health resort."

"Why don't you join us, Conn?" Fred Karski asked. "All our old gang
belong."

"I'd like to, but I'm afraid I'm going to be kind of busy."

Brangwyn nodded. "Yes. You will be, at that," he agreed.

"So I hear," Fred Karski said. "Do you really know where it is,
Conn?"

"Well, no." He went into the routine about Merlin being still
classified triple-top secret. "But we'll find it. It may take time,
but we will."

They talked for a while. He asked more questions about the Home Guard.
His father, it seemed, had donated all the equipment. They had a
hundred and seventy men on the active list, but they had a reserve of
over eight hundred, and combat vehicles and weapons on all the
plantations and in all the towns along the river. The reserve had only
been turned out twice; both times, outlaw attacks had been stopped
dead--literally. The Home Guard, it appeared, was not given to making
arrests or taking prisoners. Finally, he parted from them, strolling
on along the row of stores and business places, many vacant, under the
south edge of the Mall, until he saw a fluorolite sign, WADE
LUCAS, M. D. He entered.

Lucas wasn't busy. They went into his consultation office, and Conn
took off his gun-belt and hung it up; Lucas offered cigarettes, and
they lighted and sat down.

"I see you've started carrying one," he said, nodding to the pistol
Conn had laid aside.

"Civic obligation. I'm going to be too busy for Home Guard duty, but
if I can protect myself, it'll save somebody else the job of
protecting me."

"Maybe if there weren't so many guns around, there wouldn't be so much
trouble."

He felt his good opinion of Wade Lucas start to slip. The Liberals on
Terra had been full of that kind of talk, which was why only four out
of ten of last year's graduating class at Armed Forces Academy had
been able to get active commissions. The last war had been a disaster,
so don't prepare for another one; when it comes, let it be a worse
disaster.

"Guns don't make trouble; people make trouble. If the troublemakers
are armed, you have to be armed too. When did you last see an Air
Patrol boat around here, or even a Constabulary trooper? All we have
here is the Home Guard and Tom Brangwyn and three deputies, and his
pay and theirs is always six months in arrears."

Lucas nodded. "A bankrupt government, an unemployment rate that rises
every year, currency that buys less every month. And do-it-yourself
justice." The doctor blew a smoke ring and watched it float toward the
ventilator-intake. "You said you're going to be busy. This company
your father's talking about organizing?"

"That's right. You're going to be at the meeting at the Academy this
afternoon, aren't you?"

"Yes. Just what are you going to do, after you get it organized?"

"Well, I brought back information on a great deal of undiscovered
equipment and stores that the Third Force left behind...." He talked
on for some time, keeping to safe generalities. "It's too big for my
father and me to handle alone, even if we didn't feel morally
obligated to take in the people who contributed toward sending me to
school on Terra. You ought to be interested in it. I know of six fully
supplied hospitals, intended to take care of the casualties in case of
a System States space-attack. You can imagine, better than I can, what
would be in them."

"Yes. Medical supplies of all sorts are getting hard to find. But look
here; you're not going to let these people waste time looking for this
alleged computer, this thing they call Merlin, are you?"

"We're looking for any valuable war material. I don't know the
location of Merlin, but--"

"I'll bet you don't!" Lucas said vehemently. That was the same thing
Flora had said.

"--but Merlin is undoubtedly the most valuable item of abandoned TF
equipment on this planet. In the long run, I'd say, more valuable than
everything else together. We certainly aren't going to ignore it."

"Good heavens, Conn! You aren't like these people here; you were
educated at the University of Montevideo."

"So I was. I studied computer theory and practice. I have some doubts
about Merlin being able to do some of the things these laymen like
Kellton and Fawzi and Judge Ledue think it could. Those sorts of
misconceptions and exaggerations have to be allowed for. But I have no
doubt whatever that the master computer with which they did their
strategic planning is probably the greatest mechanism of its sort ever
built, and I have no doubt whatever that it still exists somewhere in
the Alpha System."

He almost convinced himself of it. He did not, however, convince Wade
Lucas, who was now regarding him with narrow-eyed suspicion.

"You mean you categorically state that that computer actually exists?"

"That, I think, was the general idea. Yes. I certainly do believe that
Merlin exists."

Maybe he was telling the truth. Merlin existed in the beliefs and
hopes of people like Dolf Kellton and Klem Zareff and Judge Ledue and
Kurt Fawzi. Merlin was a god to them. Well, take Ghu, the Thoran
Grandfather-God. Ghu was as preposterous, theologically, as Merlin was
technologically; Ghu, except to Thorans, was a Federation-wide joke.
But he'd known a couple of Thorans at the University, funny little
fellows, with faces like terriers, their bodies covered with matted
black hair. They believed in Ghu the way he believed in the Second Law
of Thermodynamics. Ghu was with them every moment of their lives. Take
away their belief in Ghu, and they would have been lost and wretched.

As lost and wretched as Kurt Fawzi or Judge Ledue, if they lost their
belief in Merlin. He started to say something like that, and then
thought better of it.

Yes, Virginia, there _is_ a Santa Claus.




V


The meeting was at the Academy; when Conn and his father arrived, they
found the central hall under the topside landing stage crowded. Kurt
Fawzi and Professor Kellton had constituted themselves a reception
committee. Franz Veltrin was in evidence with his audiovisual
recorder, and Colonel Zareff was leaning on his silver-headed sword
cane. Tom Brangwyn, in an unaccustomed best-suit. Wade Lucas, among a
group of merchants, arguing heatedly. Lorenzo Menardes, the
distiller, and Lester Dawes, the banker, and Morgan Gatworth, the
lawyer, talking to Judge Ledue. About four times as many as had been
in Fawzi's office the afternoon before.

Finally, everybody was shepherded into a faculty conference room;
there was a long table, and a shorter one T-wise at one end. Fawzi and
Kellton conducted them to this. Both of them were trying to preside,
Kellton because it was his Academy, and Fawzi ex officio as mayor and
professional leading citizen, and because he had come to regard Merlin
as his own private project. After everybody else was seated, the two
rival chairmen-presumptive remained on their feet. Fawzi was saying,
"Let's come to order; we must conduct this meeting regularly," and
Kellton was saying, "Gentlemen, please; let me have your attention."

If either of them took the chair, the other would resent it. Conn got
to his feet again.

"Somebody will have to preside," he said, loudly enough to cut through
the babble at the long table. "Would you take the chair, Judge Ledue?"

That stopped it. Neither of them wanted to contest the honor with the
president-judge of the Gordon Valley court.

"Excellent suggestion, Conn. Judge, will you preside?" Professor
Kellton, who had seen himself losing out to Fawzi, asked. Fawzi threw
one quick look around, estimated the situation, and got with it. "Of
course, Judge. You're the logical chairman. Here, will you sit here?"

Judge Ledue took the chair, looked around for something to use as a
gavel, and rapped sharply with a paperweight.

"Young Mr. Conn Maxwell, who has just returned from Terra, needs no
introduction to any of you," he began. Then, having established that,
he took the next ten minutes to introduce Conn. When people began
fidgeting, he wound up with: "Now, only about a dozen of us were at
the informal meeting in Mr. Fawzi's office, yesterday. Conn, would you
please repeat what you told us? Elaborate as you see fit."

Conn rose. He talked briefly about his studies on Terra to qualify
himself as an expert. Then he began describing the wealth of abandoned
and still undiscovered Federation war material and the many
installations of which he had learned, careful to avoid giving clues
to exact locations. The spaceport; the underground duplicate Force
Command Headquarters; the vast underground arsenals and shops and
supply depots. Everybody was awed, even his father; he hadn't had time
to tell him more than a fraction of it.

Finally, somebody from the long table interrupted:

"Well, Conn; how about Merlin? That's what we're interested in."

Wade Lucas snorted indignantly.

"He's telling you about real things, things worth millions of sols,
and you want him to talk about that idiotic fantasy!"

There was an angry outcry. Nobody actually shouted "_To the stake with
the blasphemer!_" but that was the general idea. Judge Ledue was
rapping loudly for order.

"I don't know the exact location of Merlin." Conn strove to make
himself heard. "The whole subject's classified top secret. But I am
certain that Merlin exists, if not on Poictesme then somewhere in the
Alpha System, and I am equally certain that we can find it."

Cheers. He waited for the hubbub to subside. Lucas was trying to yell
above it.

"You admit you couldn't learn anything about this so-called Merlin,
but you're still certain it exists?"

"Why are you certain it doesn't?"

"Why, the whole thing's absurdly fantastic!"

"Maybe it is, to a layman like you. I studied computers, and it isn't
to me."

"Well, take all these elaborate preparations against space attack you
were telling us about. I think Colonel Zareff, here, who served in the
Alliance Army, will bear me out that such an attack was plainly
impossible."

Zareff started to agree, then realized that he was aiding and
comforting the enemy. "Intelligence lag," he said. "What do you
expect, with General Headquarters thirty parsecs from the fighting?"

"Yes. A computer can only process the data that's been taped into it,"
Conn said. That was a point he wanted to ram home, as forcibly and as
often as possible. "I suppose Merlin classified an Alliance attack on
Poictesme as a low-order probability, but war is the province of
chance; Clausewitz said that a thousand years ago. Foxx Travis wasn't
the sort of commander to let himself get caught, even by a very
low-order probability."

"Well how do you explain the absence, after forty years, of any
mention, in any history of the War, of Merlin? How do you get around
that?"

"I don't have to. How do you get around it?"

"_Huh?_" Lucas was startled.

"Yes. Stories about Merlin were all over Poictesme, all through the
Third Force, even to the enemy. Say the stories were unfounded; say
Merlin never existed. Yet the belief in Merlin was an important
historical fact, and no history of the War gives it so much as a
footnote." He paused for effect, then continued: "That can mean only
one thing. Systematic suppression, backed by the whole force of the
Terran Federation. A gigantic conspiracy of silence!"

Brother! If they swallow that, I have it made; they'll swallow
anything!

They did, all but Lucas. He banged his fist on the table.

"Now I've heard everything!" he shouted in disgust.

"Not quite everything, Doctor," Morgan Gatworth said. "You will hear,
one of these days, that we have found Merlin."

"Yes, that'll be the day!" Lucas sprang to his feet, his chair
toppling behind him. He shoved it aside with his foot. "I'm not going
to argue with you. Conn Maxwell gave you a thousand-year-old
quotation; I'll give you another, from Thomas Paine: 'To argue with
those who have renounced the use and authority of reason is as futile
as to administer medicine to the dead.' I'll add this. Conn Maxwell
knows better than this balderdash he's been spouting to you. I don't
know what his racket is, and I'm not staying to find out. You will,
though--to your regret."

He turned and strode from the room. There was a moment's silence,
after the door slammed behind him. Too bad, Conn thought. He would
have made a good friend. Now he was going to make a very nasty enemy.

"Well, let's get to business," his father said. "We don't have to
argue about the existence of Merlin; we know that. Let's discuss the
question of finding it."

"I still think it's somewhere off-planet," Lorenzo Menardes said. "The
moons of Pantagruel...."

Evidently he'd read something, or seen an old film, about the moons of
Pantagruel.

"No, that's too far; they'd keep it where they could use it."

"The old GHQ," Lester Dawes suggested. "Suppose it's down under that,
like the place Rodney found under Tenth Army."

"I hope not," Gathworth said. "The Planetary Government took that
over."

"Well, wherever it is, finding it is going to be expensive," Rodney
Maxwell said. "Now, to finance the search, I propose we use this
information my son brought back from Terra. Doctor Lucas was right
about one thing; that's worth millions of sols. Well, I propose, also,
that we set up a company and get it chartered; a prospecting company,
to operate under the Abandoned Property Act of 867. My son and I will
contribute this information as our share in the capitalization of the
company. The work of opening these Federation installations can go on
concurrently with the search for Merlin, and the profits can finance
it."

Silence for a moment, then a bedlam of cheering.

"Well, let's get organized," Gatworth said. "What will we call this
company?"

A number of voices shouted suggestions. Rodney Maxwell managed to get
recognition and partial silence.

"It is of the first importance," he said, "that we keep our real
objective--Merlin--as close a secret as possible. The Planetary
Government would like to get hold of it--and I leave you to ask
yourselves how far Jake Vyckhoven and his cronies are to be trusted
with anything like that--and I have no doubt the Federation might try
to take it away from us."

"Couldn't do it, Rodney," Judge Ledue objected. "Everything the
Federation abandoned in the Trisystem is public domain now. We have a
Federation Supreme Court ruling--"

"What's legality to the Federation?" Klem Zareff demanded. "They
fought a criminally illegal war of aggression against my people."

Down the table, somebody started singing "Rally Round the Banner, the
Banner Black and Green."

"Well, I think it's a good idea to keep quiet about it, myself," Kurt
Fawzi said.

"All right," Rodney Maxwell said. "Then we don't want this company to
sound like anything but another salvage company. I suggest we call it
Litchfield Exploration & Salvage."

"Good name, Rodney," Dawes approved. "That a motion? I second it."

Unanimously carried. They had a name, now, anyhow. Everybody began
suggesting other topics for consideration--capitalization, application
for charter, election of officers, stock issues. Conn paid less and
less attention. Industrial finance and organization wasn't his
subject, either. His father was plunging happily into it as though he
had been promoting companies all his life. Conn sat and doodled with
his six-color pen, mostly spherical hyperspace ships.

"We can't get all this cleared up now," Lester Dawes was protesting.
"Your Honor, I mean, Mr. Chairman; I suggest that committees be
appointed...."

More hassling; everybody wanted to be on all the committees. Finally,
they appointed enough committees to include everybody.

"Well, that seems to be cleared up," Judge Ledue said, "I suggest a
meeting day after tomorrow evening; the committees should have
everything set up, and we should be able to organize ourselves and
elect permanent officers. Is there anything else to discuss, or do I
hear a motion to adjourn?"

Somebody thought they ought to have some idea of what the first
operation would be.

"You heard me mention a spaceport," Conn said. "I can tell you, now,
that it's over on Barathrum, inside the crater of an extinct volcano.
I think we ought to have a look at that, first of all."

"I know you seemed to think yesterday that Merlin is off-planet,"
Fawzi said, "I'm inclined to disagree, Conn. I think it's right here
on Poictesme."

"We ought to nail that spaceport down first," Conn argued.

"Conn, you mentioned an underground duplicate of Travis's general
headquarters," Zareff said. "They thought we'd possibly send a fleet
here to blitz Poictesme, or they wouldn't have built that. And this
underground headquarters would be the safest place on the planet;
they'd make sure of that. Staff brass don't like to get caught out in
the rain, not when it's raining hellburners and planetbusters. Merlin
would be too big to take there along with them, so they'd put it there
in the first place."

That made sense. If he'd been Foxx Travis, and if there had been a
Merlin, that was exactly where he'd have put it himself. But there was
no Merlin, and he wanted a ship. He argued mulishly for a little, then
saw that it was hopeless and gave in.

"I want to find Merlin as much as any of you," he said. "More. Merlin
was the only thing I was trained for. We'll look there first."

Somebody asked where, approximately, this underground Force Command
headquarters was.

"Why, it's in the Badlands, over between the Blaubergs and the east
coast."

"Great Ghu! We'll need an army to go in there!" Tom Brangwyn said.
"That's where all these outlaws have been coming from, Blackie Perales
and all."

"Then we'll get an army together," Klem Zareff said happily. "Might
make a little of that reward money that's been offered."

"We'll need more than that. Well need excavation equipment, and labor.
Lots of labor," Conn said. "It's a couple of hundred feet below the
surface; from the plans, I'd say they just dug a big pit, built the
headquarters in it, and filled it in. There are two entrances, a
vertical shaft and a horizontal tunnel."

"When they pulled out, they probably filled the shaft and vitrified
the rock at the outer ends," his father added. "That was what they did
at Tenth Army."

Another idea hit him. "Mr. Mayor, do you think you could set up some
kind of a public-works program here in Litchfield? We can't start this
till after the wine-pressing's over, and we'll need a lot of labor, as
I pointed out. Now, it's important that we keep all our projects a
secret until we can get our claims filed. If we start this municipal
fix-up-and-clean-up program, we can give work to a lot of these
drifters who haven't been able to get jobs on the plantations, get
them organized into gangs, and keep them together till we're ready for
the Force Command job."

Lorenzo Menardes supported the idea. "And while they were boondoggling
around in Litchfield, we could pick out the best workers, get rid of
the incompetents, and train a few supervisors. That's going to be one
of our worst headaches; getting capable supervisors."

"You telling me?" Rodney Maxwell asked. "That was what I was wondering
about: where we'd get gang-bosses. And another thing; this municipal
housecleaning would mask our real preparations."

"Well, we need something like that," Fawzi said. "We've needed it for
a long time. I guess it took Conn, coming home from Terra, to see how
badly we've let the town get run down. Franz, suppose you and Tom
Brangwyn and Lorenzo form a committee on that. Look around, see what
needs fixing up worst, and set up a project. Who's city engineer now?"

"Abe O'Leary; he died six years ago," Dawes said. "You never appointed
his successor."

"Well, I guess I never got around to that," the mayor of Litchfield
admitted.

When the meeting finally adjourned, they went up and got in the car;
his father lifted it straight up to thirty thousand feet and started
circling. An aircar was one place where they could talk safely.

"Conn, I was kind of worried, down there. You were being a little too
positive. You know, you're only twenty-three. As long as you agree
with those people, you're a brilliant young man; you start getting
ideas of your own, and you're just a half-baked kid. You let the older
and wiser heads run things. You can't begin to hope to foul things up
the way they can. Look at all the experience they've had."

"But we've got to have a ship. Everything depends on that."

"I know it does. We'll get a ship. Let Kurt Fawzi and Klem Zareff and
the rest of them have this duplicate Force Command thing first,
though. Keep them happy. As soon as we have that opened, you can take
a gang and run over to Barathrum and grab your spaceport. Wait till
they find out that Merlin isn't at Force Command Duplicate. Then you
can convince them it's really on Koshchei."




VI


The car Rodney Maxwell got out of the hangar the next morning wasn't
the one he and Conn had gone to the meeting in; it was the one he had
flown in from Tenth Army HQ at noon of the previous day. An Army
reconnaissance job, slim and needlelike, completely enclosed, looking
more like a missile than a vehicle, and armored in dazzling,
iridescent collapsium. There was something to living on Poictesme, at
that; only a millionaire on Terra could have owned a car like that.

"Nice," Conn said. "Where did you dig it?"

"Where we're going, Tenth Army."

"I'll bet she'll do Mach Three."

"Better than that. I've never had her above 2.5, but the airspeed
gauge is marked up to four. And she has everything: all kinds of
detection instruments, cameras, audiovisual pickups, armament. And
the armor; you can take her through any kind of radiation."

The armor was only a couple of micromicrons thick, but it would stop
anything. It was collapsed matter, the electron shells of the atoms
collapsed upon the nuclei, the atoms in actual contact. That plating
made eighth-inch sheet steel as heavy as twelve-inch armor plate, and
in texture and shielding properties, lead was like sponge by
comparison.

They climbed in, and Rodney Maxwell snapped on the screens that served
as windows. Conn leaned back and looked at the underside view in a
screen on the roof of the car, as his father started the lift-engine.

"Still think it's worth the price, son?" his father asked.

The price had begun to rise; even so, he was afraid that what they had
paid so far was only the down payment. Dinner last evening. Flora, who
had evidently been talking to Wade Lucas, shouting accusations at
them; his mother fleeing from the table in tears. As the car rose, he
reached out and turned on and adjusted the telescreen for the
under-view.

"Keep your eye on that, Father," he said. "That's what we're paying to
get rid of."

A distillery, bigger than the Menardes plant, long closed and now half
roofless and crumbling. Rows of warehouses, empty after the War until
taken over by homeless vagrants. Jerry-built shanties with rattletrap
aircars grounded around them. Tramptown, a festering sore on the south
side of Litchfield.

"If we put this over," he continued, "all those tramps will have
steady work and good homes. We can have a park there, with fountains
that'll work. Maybe even Flora and Mother will think we've done
something worth doing."

"It'll be kind of hard to take in the meantime, though, but if you can
take it, I can." Rodney Maxwell turned off the underside teleview
screen and put on the forward one. "See that little pink spot over
there? Sunrise on the east side of Snagtooth; Tenth Army's just behind
us. Now, let's see if this airspeed gauge is telling the truth or just
bragging."

Sudden acceleration pushed them back in their seats. The calibrations
on the gauge rose swiftly; the pink-lighted peak grew swiftly in the
teleview screen. The gauge hadn't been bragging, it had been
understating; the car had more speed than the instrument could
register. Two and a half minutes from Litchfield, they were
decelerating and swinging slowly around Snagtooth, looking down on a
tilted plateau that ended on the western side in a sheer drop of
almost a thousand feet.

There were ruinous buildings on it: barracks and storehouses and
offices, an airship dock and an air-traffic control tower from which
all the glass had long ago vanished, a great steel telecast tower that
had fallen, crushing a couple of buildings. Young trees had already
grown among the wreckage.

"Look over there, on the slope below it; there's one entrance to the
shelters." There was a clearing among the evergreens, half a mile from
the buildings, and raw earth, and a couple of big scows grounded near.
"They bulldozed rock and earth over the end of the tunnel. Then,
there's another one down on that bench, a couple of hundred feet below
the edge of the plateau. They blasted rock down over that. The main
entrance is a vertical shaft under that pre-stressed concrete dome.
That was chapel, auditorium, or something. They just covered it with
sheet metal and poured a foot of concrete on top."

They floated down above the broken roofs and crumbling walls, and
grounded in the area between the main administration building and the
offices, back of the ship docks. Once, he supposed, it had been a
lawn. Then it had been a jungle. Now it was a scuffed, littered,
bare-trodden work-yard. Men were straggling out of the administration
building, lighting pipes and cigarettes; they all wore new but
work-soiled infantry battle dress. All of them waved and shouted
greetings; one, about Conn's own age, approached. As he got out, Conn
saw the resemblance to Lester Dawes, the banker, before he recognized
Anse Dawes, who had been one of his closest friends six years ago.
They shook hands and pounded each other on the back.

"Hey, you're looking great, Conn!" They all told him that; he'd begin
to believe it pretty soon. "Sorry I couldn't make the party, but
somebody had to sit on the lid here, and Jerry Rivas and I cut cards
for it and Jerry won."

"You didn't tell me Anse was with you," he reproached his father.
Rodney Maxwell said he'd been saving that for a surprise.

When Conn asked Anse what was the matter with the bank, he said: "For
the birds; I'd as soon count sheets of toilet paper as this stuff
we're using for money. Sooner. Toilet paper can be used for something,
and this paper money's too stiff. Maybe some of this stuff we're
digging here isn't worth much, but at least it's real."

That was something else the Maxwell Plan would have to take care of.
Gresham's Law was running hog-wild on Poictesme. A Planetary
Government sol was worth about ten centisols, Federation, and aside
from deposit boxes, woolen socks under the mattress, and tin cans
buried in the corner of the cellar, Federation currency was
nonexistent.

"Had breakfast yet?" Rodney Maxwell asked.

"Oh, hours ago. I was out and shot another spikenose; it's hanging up
back of the kitchen, waiting for the cook to skin it and cut it up."
He grinned at Conn. "You don't get this kind of hunting in a bank,
either."

"Jerry still inside? I want to see him. Suppose you take Conn around
and show him the sights. And don't worry about him bumping you out of
a job. Worry about the six or eight extra jobs you'll have to do
besides your own, from now on."

Conn and Anse crossed the yard and entered one of the office
buildings, through a big breach in the wall. Anse said: "I did that
myself; 90-mm tank gun. When we want a wall out of the way, we get it
out of the way." Inside were a lot of lifters and skids and power
shovels and things; laborers were assembling for work assignments.
Most of them had been with his father six years ago and he knew them.
They hadn't done any growing up in the meantime. They climbed into an
airjeep and floated out over the edge of the plateau, letting down
past the sheer cliff to where the lower lateral shaft had been opened.
A great deal of rock had been shoveled and bulldozed away to expose
it; it was twenty feet high and forty wide. Anse simply steered the
jeep inside and up the tunnel.

There were occasional lights on at the ceiling. Anse said they were
all powered from their own nuclear-electric conversion units. "We
don't have the central power on here; there's a big mass-energy
converter, but we're tearing it down to ship out."

That was something they could get a good price for. Maybe even
one-tenth of what it was worth. At least they wouldn't have to sell it
by the ton.

The tunnel ended in an enormous room a couple of hundred feet square
and fifty high. There was a wide aisle up the middle; on either side,
contragravity equipment was massed. Tanks with long 90-mm guns. Combat
cars. Small airboats. Rank on rank of air-cavalry single-mounts,
egg-shaped things just big enough for a man to sit in, with quadruple
machine guns in front and flame-jets behind. Ambulances armored
against radiation; decontamination units; mobile workshops; mobile
kitchens. Troop carriers, jeeps, staff cars; power shovels,
manipulators, lifters. All waiting, for forty years, to swarm out as
soon as the bombs that never came stopped falling.

They floated the jeep along hallways beyond, and got down to look into
rooms. Work was already going on in the power plant; a gang under a
slim young man whom Anse introduced as Mohammed Matsui were using
repair-robots to get canisters of live plutonium out of a reactor.
Workshops. Laundries. Storerooms. Kitchens, some stripped and a few
still intact. A hospital. Guardhouse and lockup.

More storerooms on the level above, reached by returning to the
vehicle hangar and lifting to an upper entrance. By this time, gangs
were at work there, too, moving contragravity skids in empty and out
loaded.

"The CO here must have had squirrel blood," Anse said. "I think when
the evacuation orders came through he just gathered up everything
there was topside and crammed it down here, any old way. Honest to
Ghu, this place was packed solid when we found it. Nobody'd believe
it."

"Wait till you see the next one."

"You mean there's another place like this?"

"You can say so. You can say a twenty-megaton thermonuclear is like a
hand grenade, too."

Anse Dawes simply didn't believe that.

When they got back to the Administration Building on top, they found
Rodney Maxwell, Jerry Rivas, the general foremen, and half a dozen
gang foremen, in consultation.

"We're getting a hundred and fifty more men and ten farm scows from
Litchfield," his father said. "Dave McCade's coming out from our yard,
and Tom Brangwyn's sending one of his deputies to help boss them. Well
have to keep an eye on this crowd; they're all Tramptown hoodlums, but
that's the best we can get. We're going to have to get this place
cleaned out in a hurry. We only have about two weeks till the
wine-pressing's over, and then we want to start the next operation.
Conn, did you see all that engineering equipment, down on the bottom
level?"

"Yes. I think we ought to leave a lot of that here--the shovels and
bulldozers and manipulators and so on. We can move it direct to Force
Command. How are we fixed for blasting explosives?"

"Name it and we have it. Cataclysmite, FJ-7, anything you want."

"We'll need a lot of it."

"We're going to have to get a ship. I mean a contragravity ship, a
freighter; first, to move this stuff out of here, and then to move the
stuff out of Force Command. And we want it mounted with heavy
armament, too. We not only want a freighter, we want a fighting ship."

"You think so?"

"I'm sure of it," Rodney Maxwell said. "Where we're going is full of
outlaws; there must be hundreds of them holing up over there. That's
where all the trouble on the east coast comes from. Now, outlaws are
sure-thing players. They want to be alive to spend their loot, and
they won't tackle anything that's too tough for them. A lot of guards
and combat equipment may look like a loss on the books, but the books
won't show how much of a loss you might take if you didn't have them.
I want this operation armed till it'll be too much for all the outlaws
on the planet to tackle."

That made sense. It also made sense out of the billions of sols the
Federation had spent preparing for an invasion that never came. If it
had come and found them unprepared, the loss might have been the war
itself.

The scows and the newly hired workers began arriving a little after
noon. The scows had been borrowed from plantations where the crop
had been gotten in; there were melon leaves and bits of vine in
the bottoms. The workers were a bleary-eyed and unsavory lot;
Conn had a suspicion, which Brangwyn's deputy confirmed, that
they had been collected by mass vagrancy arrests in Tramptown.
As soon as they started arriving, Jerry Rivas hurried down to
the old provost-marshal's headquarters and came back with a lot
of rubber billy-clubs, which he issued to his gang-bosses, regular
and temporary. A few times they had to be used. By evening, however,
the insubordinate and troublesome had been quieted. They would all
steal anything they could put in their pockets, but that was to be
expected. By evening, too, the contents of the underground treasure
trove was moving out in a steady stream, and scows were shuttling to
and from Litchfield.

Rodney Maxwell was going back to town after lunch the next day. Conn
wanted to know if he should go along.

"No, you stay here; help keep things moving. Remember what I told you
about the older and wiser heads? Let me handle them. I've been around
them, heaven pity me, longer than you have. Just give me an
audiovisual of your proxy and I'll vote your stock."

"How much stock do I have, by the way?"

"The same as I have--ten thousand five hundred shares of common, at
twenty centisols a share. But watch where it goes after we open Force
Command."

His father was back, two days later, to report:

"We're organized. Kurt Fawzi's president, of course, and does he love
it. That'll keep him out of mischief. Dolf Kellton's secretary; he has
an office force at the Academy and can conscript students to help.
He's organizing a research team from his seniors and post-grad
students to work in the Planetary Library at Storisende. There are a
lot of old Third Force records there; he may find something useful. Of
course, Lester Dawes is treasurer."

"What are you?"

"Vice-president in charge of operations. That's what I spent all
yesterday log-rolling, baby-kissing and cigar-passing to get."

"And what am I, if it's a fair question?"

"You have a very distinguished position; you are a non-office-holding
stockholder. The only other one is Judge Ledue; as a member of the
judiciary, he did not feel it proper to accept official position in a
private corporation. Tom Brangwyn's Chief of Company Police; Klem
Fawzi is Commander of the Company Guards. And we have a law firm in
Storisende lined up to handle our charter application. Sterber, Flynn
& Chen-Wong. Sterber's married to Jake Vyckhoven's sister, Flynn's son
is married to the daughter of the Secretary of the Treasury, and
Chen-Wong is a nephew of the Chief Justice. All of them are directly
descended from members of Genji Gartner's original crew."

"You don't anticipate any trouble about getting the charter?"

"Not exactly. And Lester Dawes is in Storisende now, trying to find us
a contragravity ship. There are about a dozen in the hands of
receivers for bankrupt shipping companies; he might find one that's
still airworthy. Oh; you remember how I insisted on absolute secrecy
about our Merlin objective? That's working out better than my fondest
expectations. It's leaking like a machine-gunned water tank, and
everybody it leaks to is positive that we know exactly where Merlin is
or we wouldn't be trying to keep it a secret."

Three days later, Conn hitched a ride on a freight-scow to Litchfield.
From the air, he could see a haze of bonfire smoke over High Garden
Terrace, and a gang of men at work. There were more men at work on the
Mall and along the streets on either side. He went up from the yard
below the house, where the scow was being unloaded, and found his
mother in the living room watching a screen play with one eye and
keeping the other on a soulless machine like a miniature contragravity
tank, which was going over the carpet with a vacuum cleaner and taking
swipes at the furniture with a rotary dustmop. She was glad to see
him, and then became troubled.

"Conn, when Flora comes home, you won't argue with her, will you?"

"Only in self-defense." That was the wrong thing to say. He changed it
to, "No; I won't argue with her at all," and then quoted Wade Lucas
quoting Thomas Paine. Then he had to assure his mother a couple of
times that there really was a Merlin, and then assure her that it
wouldn't get loose and hurt anybody if he did find it.

In the middle of his assurances about the harmlessness of Merlin, the
housecleaning-robot began knocking things off the top of a table.

"Oscar! You stop that!" his mother yelled.

Oscar, deaf as the adder, kept on. Conn yelled at his mother to use
her control; she remembered that she had one, a thing like an
old-fashioned pocket watch, around her neck on a chain, and got the
robot stopped.

No wonder she was afraid of Merlin.

He took advantage of the interruption to get to his room and change
clothes, then went up to the hangar and got out an air-cavalry mount.
About fifty men were working on High Garden Terrace, pruning and
trimming and leveling the lawns. There was a big vitrifier on the
Mall--even at five hundred feet he could feel the heat from
it--chuffing and clanking and pouring lavalike molten rock for a new
pavement. And all the nymphs and satyrs and dryads and fauns and
centaurs had had their pedestals rebuilt and were sand-blasted clean.

He landed on the top of the Airlines Building and rode a lift down to
the office where Kurt Fawzi neglected the affairs of his shipline
agency, his brokerage business, and the city of Litchfield. The
afternoon habitues had begun to gather--Raymond Fitch, the
used-vehicles dealer, Lorenzo Menardes, Judge Ledue, Tom Brangwyn,
Klem Zareff. Fawzi was on the screen, talking to somebody with sandy
hair and a suit that didn't seem to be made of any sort of Federation
Armed Forces material, about warehouse facilities. The addresses they
were mentioning were in Storisende.

"No, Leo, I don't know when," Fawzi was saying, "but don't you worry.
You just have space for it, and we'll fill it up. And don't ask me
what sort of stuff. You know what a salvage operation's like; you just
haul out the stuff as you come to it."

Tom Brangwyn, lounging in one of the deep chairs, looked up.

"Hello, Conn. We're having a time. Another two hundred tramps came in
on the _Countess_ this morning, and Ghu only knows how many in their
own vehicles, and they all seem to think if there's work for some
there ought to be work for all, and some of them are getting nasty."

"We can use some more out at the dig. The ones you sent out Thursday
are doing all right, once they found out we weren't taking any
foolishness."

Fawzi turned away from the screen. "Well, Conn, we're in," he said.
"The charter was granted this morning; now we're Litchfield
Exploration & Salvage, Ltd. And Lester Dawes has found us a
contragravity ship."

"How much will it cost us?"

Fawzi began to laugh. "Conn, this'll slay you! She isn't costing us a
centisol. You know those old ships on Mothball Row, back of the old
West End ship docks at Storisende?"

Conn nodded. He'd seen them before he had gone away, and from the

_City of Asgard_ coming in--a lot of old Army Transport craft, covered
with muslin and sprayed with protectoplast. The Planetary Government
had taken them over after the War and forgotten them.

"Well, Lester's getting one of them for us under the old 878
Commercial Enterprise Encouragement Act. She's an Army combat
freighter, regimental ammunition ship. Of course, she still has
armament; we'll have to pay to get that off."

"Why?"

Fawzi looked at him in surprise. "It would only be in the way and add
weight. We want her for a cargo ship, don't we?"

"That's what she was built for. What kind of armament?"

Fawzi didn't know. Klem Zareff did.

"Four 115-mm rifles, two fore and two aft. A pair of lift-and-drive
missile launchers amidships. And a secondary gun battery of 70-mm's
and 50-mm auto-cannon. I know the class; we captured a few of them.
Good ships."

Fawzi was horrified. "Why, that's more firepower than the whole Air
Patrol. Look, the Government won't like our having anything like
that."

"They're giving her to us, aren't they?" Menardes asked.

"Gehenna with what the Government likes!" the old Rebel swore. "If
they'd put a few of those ships into commission, they could wipe out
these outlaws and a private company wouldn't need an armed ship."

"May I use your screen, Kurt?" Conn asked.

When Fawzi nodded, he punched out the combination of the operating
office at Tenth Army, and finally got his father on. He told him about
the ship.

"There's talk about tearing the armament out," he added.

"Is that so, now? Well, I'll call Lester Dawes before he can get
started on it. I think I'll go in to Storisende tomorrow and see the
ship for myself. See what I can do about ammunition for those guns,
too."

"But, Rod," Fawzi protested, joining the conversation, "we don't want
to start a war."

"No. We want to stay out of one. You don't do that by disarming. We're
taking that ship down into the Badlands. Remember?" Rodney Maxwell
said. "Ever hear the name Blackie Perales?"

Fawzi had. He stopped arguing about armament. Instead, he began
worrying about how much the civic clean-up campaign was costing
Litchfield.

"You think we really need that, Rod?"

"Of course we do. You'd be surprised how much labor we're going to
need, and how hard up we're going to be for capable supervisors. This
thing's a training program, Kurt, and we'll need every man we train on
it."

"But it's costing like Nifflheim, Rod. We're going to bankrupt the
city."

"Worse than it is now, you mean? Oh, don't worry, Kurt. As soon as we
find Merlin, everything'll be all right."

Franz Veltrin came in, shortly after Rodney Maxwell was off the
screen. He dropped his audiovisual camera and sound recorder on the
table, laid his pistol-belt on top of them and took a drink of brandy,
downing it with the audible satisfaction of a thirsty horse at a
trough. Then he looked around accusingly.

"Somebody's been talking!" he declared. "I've had all the news
services on the planet on my screen today; they all want the story
about what's happening here. They've heard we know where Merlin is;
that Conn Maxwell found out on Terra."

"They just put two and two together and threw seven," Conn said. "A
_Herald-Guardian_ ship-news reporter interviewed me when I got in, and
found out I'd been studying cybernetics and computer theory on Terra.
What did you tell them?"

"Complete denial. We don't know a thing about Merlin. Naturally, they
didn't believe me. A bunch of them are coming out here tomorrow. What
are we going to tell them? We'll all have to have the same story."

"I," said Judge Ledue, "am not going to be interviewed, I am leaving
town till they're gone."

"Why don't you steer them onto Wade Lucas?" Conn asked. "If you want
anything denied, he'll do it for you."

Everybody thought that was a wonderful idea, except Klem Zareff, and
he waited until Conn was ready to go and rode up to the landing stage
with him.

"Conn, I know this Lucas is going to marry your sister," he began,
"but how much do you know about him?"

"Not much. He seems like a nice chap. I don't hold what he said at the
meeting against him. I suppose if I'd come from off-planet, I wouldn't
believe in Merlin either."

"Hah! But doesn't he believe in Merlin?"

"He makes noises like it."

"You know what I think?" Klem Zareff lowered his voice to a whisper.
"I think he's a Federation spy! I think the Federation's lost Merlin.
That's why they haven't come back to get it long ago."

"Pretty big thing to mislay."

"It could happen. There'd only be a few scientists and some high staff
officers who'd know where it was. Well, say they all went back to
Terra on the same ship, and the ship was lost at space. Sabotage, one
of our commerce raiders that hadn't heard the War was over, maybe just
an ordinary accident. But the ship's lost, and the location of
Merlin's lost with her."

"That could happen," Conn agreed seriously.

"All right. So ever since, they've had people here, listening,
watching, spying. This Lucas; he showed up here about a year after you
went to Terra. And who does he get engaged to? Your sister. And what
does he do here? Goes around arguing that there is no Merlin, getting
people to argue with him, getting them mad, so they'll blurt out
anything they know. I'm an old field officer; I know all the
prisoner-interrogation tricks in the book, and that's always been one
of the best."

"Then why did he act the way he did at the meeting? All he did there
was cut himself off from learning anything more from any of us. In his
place, would you have done that? No; you'd have tried to take the lead
in hunting for Merlin yourself. Now wouldn't you?"

Zareff was silent, first puzzled, and then hurt. Now he would have to
tear the whole idea down and build it over.

Flora was quite friendly when she came home from school. She'd found
out, somewhere, that Conn had been the originator of the municipal
face-lifting project. He was tempted, briefly, to tell her a little,
if not all, of the truth about the Maxwell Plan, then decided against
it. The way to keep a secret was to confide it to nobody; every time
you did, you doubled, maybe even squared, the chances of exposure.

He told his father, when Rodney Maxwell came in from the dig, about
his talk with Klem Zareff.

"How long's he been like that, anyhow?" he asked.

"As long as I've known him. When it comes to melons and wine and
bossing tramp labor and taking care of his money and coming in out of
the rain, Klem Zareff's as sane as I am. But on the subject of the
Terran Federation, he's crazy as a bedbug. What is a bedbug, anyhow?"

"They have them on Terra, in places like Tramptown. They have places
like Tramptown on Terra, too."

"Uhuh. I suppose, in Klem's boots, I'd be just as crazy as he is,"
Rodney Maxwell said. "One minute, he had a wife and two children in
Kindelburg, on Ashmodai, and the next minute Kindelburg was a puddle
of radioactive slag."

"That was in '51, wasn't it? I read about it," Conn said. "It was a
famous victory."

That was from a poem, too.

Rodney Maxwell flew to Storisende early the next morning. Conn rode
back to Tenth Army on an empty scow and pitched into the job of
getting the stores and equipment out of the underground shelters. More
farm-tramps arrived, and had to be pounded into obedience and taught
the work. At the same time, Litchfield was getting a steady influx of
job-seekers, and a secondary swarm of thugs, grifters and gangsters
who followed them. Klem Zareff, having gotten all his melons pressed,
came out to Tenth Army, where he selected fifty of the best men from
the work-gangs and began drilling them as soldiers to guard the next
operation. The manual of arms, drill and salute he taught them was, of
course, System States Alliance.

A week later, the ship arrived from Storisende; a hundred and sixty
feet, three thousand tons, small enough to be berthed inside a
hyperspace transport, and fast enough to get a load of ammunition to
troops at the front, unload, and get out again before the enemy could
zero in on her, and armed to fight off any Army Air Force combat
craft. The delay had been in recruiting officers and crew. The captain
and chief engineer were out-of-work shipline officers, the gunner was
a former Federation artillery officer, and the crew looked more like
pirates than most pirates did.

They christened her the _Lester Dawes_, because Dawes had secured her
and because the name began with the initials of Litchfield Exploration &
Salvage. From then on, it was a race to see whether the Tenth Army
attack-shelters would be emptied before the wine was all pressed, or
vice versa.




VII


Fifty-two years before, they had come to the mesa in the Badlands and
dug a pit on top of it, a thousand feet in diameter and more than five
hundred deep, and in it they built a duplicate of the headquarters for
Third Fleet-Army Force Command. They built a shaft a hundred feet in
diameter like a chimney at one side, and they ran a tunnel out through
solid rock to the head of a canyon half a mile away. Then they buried
the whole thing. Twelve years later, when the War was over, they
sealed both entrances and went away and left it.

For a month each winter, cold rains from the east lashed the desert;
for the rest of the year, it was swept by windblown sand. Wiregrass
sprouted, and thornbush grew; Nature, the master-camoufleur, completed
the work of hiding the forgotten headquarters. Little things not
unlike rabbits scampered over it, and bigger things, vaguely foxlike,
hunted them. Hunted men came, too, their aircars skimming low. None of
them had the least idea what was underneath.

The mesa-top came suddenly to life, just as the sun edged up out of
the east. Conn and his father and Anse Dawes came in first, in the
recon-car with which they had scouted and photographed the site a few
days before. They circled at a thousand feet, fired a smoke bomb, and
then let down near where Conn's map showed the head of the vertical
shaft. The rest followed, first a couple of combat cars that circled
slowly, scanning the ground, and then the _Lester Dawes_ with her big
guns and her load of equipment, and behind a queue of boats and scows
and heavy engineering equipment on contragravity and troop carriers
full of workmen and guards, flanked by air cavalry, which circled
above while everything else landed, then scattered out over a
fifty-mile radius. Occasionally there was a hammering of machine guns,
either because somebody saw something on the ground that might need
shooting at or simply because it was a beautiful morning to make a
noise.

The ship settled quickly and daintily, while Conn and Anse and Rodney
Maxwell sat in the car and watched. Immediately, she began opening
like a beetle bursting from its shell, large sections of armor
swinging outward. Except for the bridge and the gun turrets, almost
the whole ship could be opened; she had been designed to land in the
middle of a battle and deliver ammunition when seconds could mean the
difference between life and death. Jeeps and lifters and manipulators
and things floated out of her. Scows began landing and unloading
prefab-hut elements. A water tank landed, and the cook-shed began
going up beside it; a lorry came in with scanning and probing
equipment, and a couple of men jumped off and huddled over a
photoprint copy of one of Conn's maps.

Conn lifted the car again and coasted it half a mile to where the
cleft in the mesa started. There were half a dozen claw-armed
manipulators already there, and two giant power shovels. Jerry Rivas
and one of the engineers Kurt Fawzi had hired had gotten out of a jeep
and were looking at another photoprint of the map. Rivas pointed to
the head of the canyon, where a mass of rock had slid down.

"That's it; you can still see where they put off the shots."

The canyon was long enough and wide enough for the _Lester Dawes_
to land in it; she could be loaded directly from the tunnel. The
manipulators began moving in, wrestling with the larger chunks of
rock and dragging or carrying them away. Power shovels began grunting
and clanking and rumbling; dust rose in a thick column. Toward
midmorning, the troop carriers which served as school buses in
Litchfield arrived, loaded with more workmen. A lorry lettered
STORISENDE HERALD-GUARDIAN came in, hovered over the canyon, and
began transmitting audiovisuals. More news-folk put in an appearance.

The earth and rock at the top of the tunnel entrance fell away,
revealing the vitrified stone lintel; everybody cheered and dug
harder. More aircars arrived, getting in each other's and everybody
else's way. Raymond Fitch, Lester Dawes, Lorenzo Menardes and Morgan
Gatworth. Dolf Kellton, playing hookey from school. Kurt Fawzi; he
landed in the canyon and watched every shovelful of rock lifted, as
though trying to help with mental force. Tom Brangwyn, with a score of
the Home Guard to reinforce the Company Police. Klem Zareff called in
his air cavalry to help control the sightseers. Nobody was making
trouble; they were just getting in the way.

At eleven, Rodney Maxwell went aboard the _Lester Dawes_ to use the
radio and telescreen equipment. By then, two time zones west in
Storisende, the Claims Office was opening; he filed preliminary claim
to an underground installation with at least two entrances in
uninhabited country, and claimed a ten-mile radius around it. By that
time, the gang working on top had uncovered a vitrified slab over the
hundred-foot circle of the vertical shaft and were cracking it with
explosives. According to the scanners, it was full of loose rubble for
a hundred feet down. Below that, the microrays hit something
impenetrable.

Toward midafternoon, the tunnel in the canyon was cleared. It had been
vitrified solid; the scanners reported that it was plugged for ten
feet. A contragravity tank let down in front of it, with a solenoid
jackhammer mounted where the gun should have been, and began pounding,
running a hole in for a blast shot. There were more explosions
topside; when Conn took a jeep up to observe progress there, he found
the vitrified rock blown completely off the vertical shaft, exposing
the rubble that had been dumped into it. The gang on the mesa-top had
discovered something else; a grid of auro-copper bussbars buried four
feet underground. Ten to one, radio and telescreen signals would be
transmitted to that from below, and then probably picked up and
rebroadcast from a relay station on one or another of the high buttes
in the neighborhood. Time enough to look for that later. He returned
to the canyon, where the lateral tunnel was now almost completely
open.

When it was clear, they sent a snooper in first. It was a robot,
looking slightly like a short-tailed tadpole, six feet long by three
feet at the thickest. It transmitted a view of the tunnel as it went
slowly in; the air, it found, was breathable, and there were no
harmful radiations or other dangers. According to the plans, there
should be a big room at the other end, slightly curved, a hundred feet
wide by a hundred on either side of the tunnel entrance. The robot
entered this, and in its headlight they could see reconnaissance-cars,
and contragravity tanks with 90-mm guns. It swerved slightly to the
left, and then the screen stopped receiving, the telemetered
instruments went dead and the robot's signal stopped.

"Tom," Rodney Maxwell said, "you keep the crowd back. Klem, stay with
the screens; I'll transmit to you. I'm going in to see what's wrong."

He started to give Conn an argument when he wanted to accompany him.

"No," Conn said. "I'm going along. What do you think I went to Terra
to study robotics for?"

His father snapped on the screen and pickup of the jeep that was
standing nearby. "You getting it, Klem?" he asked. "Okay, Conn. Let's
go."

Half a mile ahead, at the other end of the tunnel, they could see a
flicker of light that grew brighter as they advanced. The snooper
still had its light on and was moving about. Once they caught a
momentary signal from it. As Rodney Maxwell piloted the jeep, Conn
kept talking to Klem Zareff, outside. Then they were at the end of the
tunnel and entering the room ahead; it was full of vehicles, like the
one on the bottom level at Tenth Army HQ. As soon as they were inside,
Klem Zareff's voice in the radio stopped, as though the set had been
shot out.

"Klem! What's wrong? We aren't getting you," his father was saying.

The snooper was drifting aimlessly about, avoiding the parked
vehicles. Conn used the manual control to set it down and deactivate
it, then got out and went to examine it.

"Take the jeep over to the tunnel entrance," he told his father.
"Move out into the tunnel a few feet; relay from me to Klem."

The jeep moved over. A moment later his father cried, "He's getting
me; I'm getting him. What's the matter with the radio in here? The
snooper's all right, isn't it?"

It was. Conn reactivated it and put it up above the tops of the
vehicles.

"Sure. We just can't transmit out."

"But only half a mile of rock; that set's good for more than that.
It'll transmit clear through Snagtooth."

"It won't transmit through collapsium."

His father swore disgustedly, repeating it to Zareff outside. Conn
could hear the old soldier, in the radio, make a similar remark. They
should have all expected that, in the first place. If the Third Force
High Command was expecting to sit out a nuclear bombardment in this
place, they'd armor it against anything.

"Bring the gang in; it's safe as far as we've gotten," his father
said. "We'll just have to string wires out."

Conn used his flashlight and found the power unit for the room lights;
all the overhead lights were wired to one unit, if wired were the word
for gold-leaf circuits cemented to the walls and covered with
insulating paint. For the heavy stuff, like the ventilator fans,
they'd have to find the central power plant. He looked around the big
room, poking into some of the closets that lined it. Radiation-proof
clothing. Tools. Arms and ammunition. First-aid kits. Emergency
rations. All the vehicles were plated in shimmering collapsium.

The crowd started coming in: the work-gangs selected for the first
exploration work, most of them old hands of Rodney Maxwell's; the
engineers they had recruited; Mohammed Matsui--he had a gang of his
own, the same one he had been using in tearing down the converter at
Tenth Army; the stockholders and officials; the press. And everybody
else Tom Brangwyn's police hadn't been able to keep out.

The power plant was at the extreme bottom; Matsui began looking it over
at once. Above it they found the service facilities--air-and-water
plant; pumps for the artesian well; sewage disposal. Then repair ships,
and a laboratory, and laundries and kitchens above that.

"Where do you suppose it is?" Kurt Fawzi was asking. "Up at the very
top, I suppose. Let's go up and work down; I can't wait till we've
found it."

Like a kid on Christmas Eve, Conn thought. And there was no Santa
Claus, and Christmas had been abolished.

The place was built in concentric circles, level above level. Combat
equipment nearest the tunnel exit and nearest the vertical shaft, and
ambulances and decontamination units and equipment for relief and
rebuilding next. Storerooms, mile on circular mile of them. Not the
hasty packrat cramming he'd seen at Tenth Army; everything had been
brought in in order, carefully piled or racked, and then left. More
stores for the next three levels up; then living quarters. Enlisted
men's and women's quarters, no signs of occupancy. Enlisted kitchens
and mess halls, untouched.

Most of the officers' quarters were similarly unused, but here and
there some had been occupied. A sloppily made bed. A used cake of soap
in the bathroom. An empty bottle in a closet. Officers' commissary
stores had been used from and replaced; the officers' mess hall and
kitchen had been in constant use, and the officers' club had a
comfortably scuffed and lived-in look. There had been a few people
there all the time of the War.

"Men and women, all officers or civilians," Klem Zareff said. "Didn't
even have enlisted men to cook for them. And we haven't found a scrap
of paper with writing on it, or an inch of recorded sound-tape or
audiovisual film. Remember those big wire baskets, down at the
mass-energy converters? Before they left, they disintegrated every
scrap of writing or recording. This is where Merlin is; they were the
people who worked with it."

And above, offices. General Staff. War Planning, with an incredibly
complex star-map of the theater of war. Judge Advocate General.
Inspector General. Service of Supply. They were full of computers,
each one firing the hopes of people like Fawzi and Dolf Kellton and
Judge Ledue, but they were only special-purpose machines, the sort to
be found in any big business office. The Storisende Stock Exchange
probably had much bigger ones.

Then they found big ones, rank on rank of cabinets, long consoles
studded with lights and buttons, programming machines.

"It's Merlin!" Fawzi almost screamed. "We've found it!"

One of the reporters who had followed them in snatched his radio
handphone from his belt and jabbered, then, realizing that the
collapsium shielding kept him from getting out with it, he replaced it
and bolted away.

"Hold it!" Conn yelled at the others, who were also becoming
hysterical. "Wait till I take a look at this thing."

They managed to calm themselves. After all, he should know what it
was; wasn't that why he'd gone to school on Terra? They followed him
from machine to machine, first hopefully and then fearfully. Finally
he turned, shaking his head and feeling like the doctor in a film
show, telling the family that there's no hope for Grandpa.

"This is not Merlin. This is the personnel-file machine. It's taped
for the records and data of every man and woman in the Third Force for
the whole War. It's like the student-record machine at the
University."

"Might have known it; this section in here's marked G-1 all over
everything; that's personnel. Wouldn't have Merlin in here," Klem
Zareff was saying.

"Well, we'll just keep on hunting for it till we do find it," Kurt
Fawzi said. "It's here somewhere. It has to be."

The next level up was much smaller. Here were the offices of the top
echelons of the Force Command Staff. They, unlike the ones below, had
been used; from them, too, every scrap of writing or film or
record-tape had vanished.

Finally, they entered the private office of Force-General Foxx Travis.
It had not only been used, it was in disorder. Ashtrays full, many of
the forty-year-old cigarette ends lipstick tinted. Chairs shoved
around at random. Three bottles on the desk, with Terran bourbon
labels; two empty and one with about an inch of whisky left in it. But
no glasses.

That bothered Conn. Somehow, he couldn't quite picture the commander
and staff of the Third Fleet-Army Force passing bottles around and
drinking from the neck. Then he noticed that the wall across the room
was strangely scarred and scratched. Dropping his eye to the floor
under it, he caught the twinkle of broken glass. They had gathered
here, and talked for a long time. Then they had risen, for a final
toast, and when it was drunk, they had hurled their glasses against
the wall and smashed them.

Then they had gone out, leaving the broken glass and the empty
bottles; knowing that they would never return.




VIII


Before they returned to the lower level into which the lateral tunnel
entered, Matsui and his gang had the power plant going; the ventilator
fans were humming softly, and whenever they pressed a starting button,
the escalators began to move. They got the pumps going, and the
oxygen-generators, and the sewage disposal system. Until the
communication center could be checked and the relay station found,
they ran a cable out to the _Lester Dawes_, landed in the canyon, and
used her screen-and-radio equipment. Before the Claims Office in
Storisende closed, Rodney Maxwell had transmitted in recorded views of
the interior, and enough of a description for a final claim. They also
received teleprint copies of the Storisende papers. The first story,
in an extra edition of the _Herald-Guardian_, was headlined,
MERLIN FOUND! That would have been the reporter who bolted
off prematurely when they first saw the personnel record machines.
Conn wondered if he still had a job. A later edition corrected this,
but was full of extravagant accounts of what had been discovered.
Merlin or no Merlin, Force Command Duplicate was the biggest
abandoned-property discovery since the Third Force left the
Trisystem.

The camp they had set up on top of the mesa was used, that night, only
by Klem Zareff's guards. Everybody else was inside, eating cold
rations when hungry and, when they could keep awake no longer, bedding
down on piles of blankets or going up to the barracks rooms above.

The next day they found the relay station which rebroadcast signals
from the buried aerial--or wouldn't one say, sub-terrial--on top of
the mesa. As Conn had expected, it was on top of a high butte three
and a half miles to the south; it had been so skillfully camouflaged
that none of the outlaw bands who roamed the Badlands had found it.
After that, Force Command Duplicate was in communication with the rest
of Poictesme.

They moved into the staff headquarters at the top; Foxx Travis's
office, tidied up, became the headquarters for the company officials
and chief supervisors. The workmen quartered themselves in the
enlisted barracks, helping themselves liberally to anything they
found. The crowds of sightseers kept swarming in, giving Tom
Brangwyn's police plenty to do. Tom himself turned the marshal's
office in Litchfield over to his chief deputy. Klem Zareff insisted on
more men for his guard force. A dozen gunboats, eighty-foot craft
mounting one 90-mm gun, several smaller auto-cannon and one
missile-launcher, had been found; he took them over immediately,
naming them for capital ships of the old System States Navy. It took
some argument to dissuade him from repainting all of them black and
green. He kept them all in the air, with a swarm of smaller airboats
and combat-cars, circling the underground headquarters at a radius of
a hundred miles. These patrols reported a general exodus from the
region. At least a dozen outlaw bands, all with fast contragravity,
had been camped inside the zone. Some fled at once; the rest needed
only a few warning shots to send them away. Other bands, looking like
legitimate prospecting parties, began to filter into the Badlands.
Zareff came to Rodney Maxwell--instead of Kurt Fawzi, the titular head
of the company, which was significant--to find out what policy
regarding them would be.

"Well, we have no right to keep them out, as long as they stay outside
our ten-mile radius," Conn's father said. "And as we're the only
thing that even looks like law around here, I'd say we have an
obligation to give them protection. Have your boats investigate them;
if they're legitimate, tell them they can call on us for help if they
need it."

Conn protested, privately.

"There's a lot of stuff around here, in small caches," he said.
"Equipment for guerrilla companies, in event of invasion. When work
slacks off here, we could pick that stuff up."

"Conn, there's an old stock-market maxim: 'A bear can make money
sometimes, and a bull can make money sometimes, but in the long run, a
hog always loses.' Let the other people find some of this; it'll all
help the Plan. Fact is, I've been thinking of leaking some
information, if I can do it without Fawzi and that gang finding out.
Do you know a good supply depot or something like that, say over on
Acaire, or on the west coast? Big enough to be important, and to start
a second prospectors' rush away from us."

"How about one of those hospitals?"

"No; not a hospital. We might use them to talk Wade Lucas into joining
us. A lot of medical stores would be a good bait for him. I'm afraid
he's going to make trouble if we don't do something about him."

"Well, how about engineering and construction equipment? I know where
there's a lot of that, down to the southwest."

"That's farming country; that stuff'll be useful down there. I'll do
that."

The next morning, Rodney Maxwell scorched the stratosphere to
Storisende in his recon-car. The day after he got back, there was a
big discovery of engineering equipment to the southwest and, as he had
anticipated, a second rush of prospectors. They had the vertical shaft
clear now, and the _Lester Dawes_ was shuttling back and forth between
Force Command Duplicate and Storisende. Other ships were coming in,
now, mostly privately owned freighting ships. They bought almost
anything, as fast as it came out.

The stock market had been paralyzed for a couple of days after the
discovery of Force Command; nobody seemed to know what to sell and
what to hold. Now it was going perfectly insane. Twenty or thirty new
companies were being formed; unlike Litchfield Exploration & Salvage,
they were all offering their stock to the public. A week after the
opening of Force Command, the Stock Exchange reported the first
half-million-share day since the War. A week after that, there were
two million-share days in succession.

Some of the L. E. & S. stockholders who had come out on the first day
began drifting back to Litchfield. Lester Dawes was the first to
defect; there was nothing he could do at Force Command, and a great
deal that needed his personal attention at the bank. Morgan Gatworth
and Lorenzo Menardes and one or two others followed. Kurt Fawzi,
however, refused to leave. Merlin was somewhere here at Force Command,
he was sure of it, and he wasn't leaving till it was found. Neither
were Franz Veltrin or Dolf Kellton or Judge Ledue. Tom Brangwyn
resigned as town marshal; Klem Zareff was too busy even to think of
Merlin; he had almost as many men under his command, and twice as much
contragravity, as he had had when the System States Alliance Army had
surrendered.

Conn flew to Litchfield, and found that the public works project had
come to a stop at noon of the day when Force Command was entered, and
that nothing had been done on it since. The cold vitrifier was still
standing in the middle of the Mall, and topside Litchfield was
littered in a dozen places with forsaken equipment and half-completed
paving. There was no one in Kurt Fawzi's office in the Airlines
Building, and the employment office was jammed with migratory workers
vainly seeking jobs.

He hunted up Morgan Gatworth, the lawyer.

"Can't some of you get things started again?" he wanted to know. "This
place is worse than it was before they started cleaning up."

"Yes, I know." Gatworth walked to an open window and looked down on
the littered Mall. "But everybody just dropped everything as soon as
you opened Force Command. Kurt Fawzi's not been back here since."

"Well, you're here. Lester Dawes and Lorenzo Menardes are here. Why
don't you just take over. Kurt Fawzi couldn't care less what you do;
he's forgotten he is mayor of Litchfield. He's forgotten there is a
Litchfield."

"Well, I don't like to just move into the mayor's office and take
over...."

From somewhere below, a submachine gun hammered. There were yells,
pistol shots, and the submachine gun hammered again, a couple of short
bursts.

"Some of the farm-tramps who can't get jobs, trying to steal something
to eat, I suppose," Conn commented. Gatworth was frowning
thoughtfully. He'd only need one more, very slight, push. "Why don't
you talk to Wade Lucas. He's got brains, and he's honest--nobody but
an honest man would have made himself as unpopular as Lucas has. If
you pretend to be disillusioned with this Merlin business it might
help convince him."

"He was blaming you and your father for what's been going on here in
the last two weeks. Yes. He'd help get things straightened out."

At home, he found his mother simply dazed. She was happy to see him,
and solicitous about his and his father's health. It seemed at times,
though, as if he were somebody she had never met before. Events had
gotten so far beyond her that she wasn't even trying to catch up.

Flora, returning from school, stopped short when she saw him.

"Well! I hope you like what you've done!" she greeted him.

"For a start, yes."

"For a start! You know what you've done?"

"Yes. I don't know what you think I've done, though. Tell me."

"You've turned everything into a madhouse; you've sent this whole
world Merlin-crazy. Look at the stock market...."

"You look at it. All I can see is a pack of lunatics playing Russian
roulette with five chambers loaded out of six. Some of this so-called
stock that's being peddled around isn't worth five millisols a
share--Seekers for Merlin, Ltd., closed today at a hundred and
seventy. You notice, there isn't any L. E. & S. being traded. If you
don't believe me, talk to Lester Dawes; he'll tell you what we think
of this market."

"Well, it's your fault!"

"In part it's my fault that any of these quarter-wits have any money
to play the market with. They wouldn't have money enough to play a
five-centisol slot machine if we hadn't gotten a little business
started."

There was just a little truth to that, too. A few woolen socks were
coming out from under mattresses, and a few tin cans were being
exhumed in cellars, since the new flood of Federation equipment and
supplies had gotten on the market. He'd seen a freshly lettered sign
on Len Yeniguchi's tailor shop: QUARTER PRICE IN FEDERATION
CURRENCY.

That night, however, he had one of the nightmares he used to have as a
child--a dream of climbing up onto a huge machine and getting it
started, and then clinging, helpless and terrified, unable to stop it
as it went faster and faster toward destruction.

Klem Zareff's patrols were encountering larger outlaw bands, the
result of gang mergers. They were fighting with prospecting parties,
and prospecting parties were fighting one another. Much of this was
making the newscasts. One battle, between two regularly chartered
prospecting companies, lasted three days, with an impressive casualty
list.

Public demands were growing that the Planetary Government do something
about the situation; the Government was wondering what to do, or how.
There were indignant questions in Parliament. Finally, the Government
dragged a couple of armed ships off Mothball Row--a combat freighter
like the _Lester Dawes_, and a big assault transport--and began trying
to get them into commission.

And, of course, the market boom was still on. The newscasts were full
of that, too. He had started worrying about _if_ a bust came; now he
was worrying about what would happen _when_ it did. Another good
reason for wanting to get to Koshchei and getting a hypership built;
when the bust came, he and his father would want one, very badly.

In any case, it was time to begin getting an expedition ready for
Barathrum Spaceport. Quite a few of the new companies had large
contragravity craft, and the nascent Planetary Air Navy was
approaching a state of being. He wanted to get out there before
anybody else did.

Maybe if they got the hypership built soon enough, it would start a
second, sound boom that would cushion the crash of the present
speculative market when it came, as come it must.

He talked to Klem Zareff about borrowing a couple of the eighty-foot
gunboats. Zareff's attitude was automatically negative.

"We mustn't weaken our defense-perimeter; we'd be inviting disaster.
Why, this whole country in here is simply swarming with outlaws. They
fired on one of our gunboats, the _Werewolf_, yesterday."

He'd heard about that; somebody had launched a missile from the
ground, and the _Werewolf_ had detonated it with a counter-missile. It
had probably been some legitimate prospecting company who'd taken the
L. E. & S. craft for a pirate.

"And there was a battle down in the Devil's Pigpen day before
yesterday."

That had been outlaws; they had been annihilated by something calling
itself Seekers for Merlin, Ltd., whose stock was still skyrocketing on
the Exchange. He mentioned that.

"These other prospecting companies are doing a lot of our
outlaw-fighting for us, and as long as the country's full of small
independent parties, the outlaws go after them and leave us alone."

"Yes, and I have my doubts about a lot of these prospecting companies,
and a lot of the outlaws, too," Zareff said. "I think a lot of both
are Federation agents; they're waiting till we find Merlin, and then
they'll all jump us."

"Well," Conn adjusted his argument to the old Rebel's obsession, "I'll
admit that, as a possibility. If so, we'll need heavier weapons than
we have. This spaceport on Barathrum might be just the place to get
them."

"Yes. It might. Defense armament, and stored ships' weapons. Say, if
we grab that place and move all the heavy guns and missiles here, we
could stand off anybody." The thought of a fight with minions of the
Terran Federation seemed to have shaved ten years off his age in a
twinkling. "You take the _Lester Dawes_, and, let's say, three of
these gunboats. Let me see. _Goblin_, Fred Karski. And _Vampire_,
Charley Gatworth. And _Dragon_, Stefan Jorisson. They're all good men.
Home Guard; trained them myself."

"Aren't you coming, Colonel?"

"Oh, I'd like to, Conn, but I can't. I don't want to be away from
here; no telling what might happen. But you keep in constant
screen-contact; if you get into any trouble, I'll come with everything
I can put into the air."




IX


Barathrum was a grim land, naked black and gray. Spines and crags of
bare rock jutted up, lava-flows like black glaciers twisting among
them. It was split by faults and fissures, pimpled with ash-cones.
Except for the seabirds that nested among the cliffs and the few thin
patches of green where seeds windblown from the mainland had taken
root, it was as lifeless as when some ancient convulsion had thrust it
up from the sea, Barathrum was a dead Inferno, untenanted even by the
damned; by comparison, the Badlands seemed lushly fertile.

The four craft crossed above the line of white breakers that marked
the division of sea and land; the gunboat _Goblin_ in the lead, her
sisters, _Vampire_ and _Dragon_ to right and left and a little behind,
and the _Lester Dawes_ a few miles in the rear. Fred Karski was at the
_Goblin's_ controls; Conn, beside him, was peering ahead into the
teleview screen and shifting his eyes from it to the map and back
again.

Somebody behind him was saying that it would be a nice place to be
air-wrecked. Somebody else was telling him not to joke about it. From
the radio, his father was asking: "Can you see it, yet?"

"Not yet. We're on the right map-and-compass direction; we should
before long."

"We're picking up radiation," Fred Karski said. "Way above normal
count. I hope the place isn't hot."

"We're getting that, too," Rodney Maxwell said. "Looks like power
radiation; something must be on there."

After forty years, that didn't seem likely. He leaned over to look at
the omnigeiger, then whistled. If that was normal leakage from
inactive power units, there must be enough of them to power ten towns
the size of Litchfield.

"Something's operating there," he said, and then realized what that
meant. Somebody had beaten them to the spaceport. That would be one of
the new companies formed after the opening of Force Command. He was
wishing, now, that he hadn't let himself be talked out of coming here
first. Older and wiser heads indeed!

Fred Karski whistled shrilly into his radio phone. "Attention
everybody! General alert. Prepare for combat; prepare to take
immediate evasive action. We must assume that the spaceport is
occupied, and that the occupants are hostile. Captain Poole, will you
please make ready aboard your ship? Reduce both speed and altitude,
and ready your guns and missiles at once."

"Well, now, wait a minute, young fellow," Poole began to argue. "You
don't know--"

"No. I don't. And I want all of us alive after we find out, too,"
Karski replied.

Rodney Maxwell's voice, in the background, said something
indistinguishable. Poole said ungraciously, "Well, all right, if you
think so...."

The _Lester Dawes_ began dropping to the rear and going down toward
the ground. Conn returned to the teleview screen in time to see the
truncated cone of the extinct volcano rise on the horizon, dwarfing
everything around it. Fred Karski was talking to Colonel Zareff, back
at Force Command, giving him the radiation count.

"That's occupied," the old soldier replied. "Mass-energy converter
going. Now, Fred, don't start any shooting unless you have to, but
don't get yourself blown to MC waiting on them to fire the first
shot."

The dark cone bulked higher and higher in the screen. It must be seven
miles around the crater, and a mile deep; when that thing blew out,
ten or fifteen thousand years ago, it must have been something to see,
preferably from a ship a thousand miles off-planet. It was so huge
that it was hard to realize that the jumbled foothills around it were
themselves respectably lofty mountains.

When they were within five miles of it, something twinkled slightly
near the summit. An instant later, the missileman, in his turret
overhead, shouted:

"Missile coming up; counter-missile off!"

"Grab onto something, everybody!" Karski yelled, bracing himself in
his seat.

Conn, on his feet, flung his arms around an upright stanchion and hung
on. Fred's hand gave a twisting jerk on the steering handle; the
_Goblin_ went corkscrewing upward. In the rearview screen, Conn saw a
pink fireball blossom far below. The sound and the shock-wave never
reached them; the _Goblin_ outran them. _Dragon_ and _Vampire_ were
spiraling away in opposite directions. The radio was loud with voices,
and a few of the words were almost printable. A gong began clanging
from the command post on top of the mesa on the mainland.

"Be quiet, all of you!" Klem Zareff was bellowing. "And get back from
there. Back three or four miles; close enough so they won't dare use
thermonuclears. Take cover behind one of those ridges, where they
can't detect you. Then we can start figuring what the Gehenna to do
next."

That made sense. And get it settled who's in command of this
Donnybrook, while we're at it, Conn thought. He looked into the rear
and sideview screens, and taking cover immediately made even more
sense. Two more fireballs blossomed, one dangerously close to the
_Dragon_. Guns were firing from the mountaintop, too, big ones,
and shells were bursting close to them. He saw a shell land on and
another beside one of the enemy gun positions--115-mm's from the
_Lester Dawes_, he supposed. He continued to cling to the
stanchion, and the _Goblin_ shot straight up, and he was expecting
to see the sky blacken and the stars come out when the gunboat leveled
and started circling down again. The mountainside, he saw, was sending
up a lightning-crackling tower of smoke and dust that swelled into a
mushroom top.

Klem Zareff, on the radio, was demanding to know who'd launched that.

"We did, sir; _Dragon_," Stefan Jorisson was replying. "We had to get
rid of it. We took a hit. Gun turret's smashed, Milt Hennant's dead,
and Abe Samuels probably will be before I'm done talking, and if we
get this crate down in one piece, it'll do for a miracle till a real
one happens."

"Well, be careful how you shoot those things off," his father
implored, from the _Lester Dawes_. "Get one inside the crater and we
won't have any spaceport."

The _Lester Dawes_ vanished behind a mountain range a few miles from
the volcano. The _Dragon_, still airborne but in obvious difficulties,
was limping after her, and the _Vampire_ was covering the withdrawal,
firing rapidly but with doubtful effect with her single 90-mm and
tossing out counter-missiles. There was another fireball between her
and the mountain. Then, when the _Dragon_ had followed the _Lester
Dawes_ to safety, she turned tail and bolted, the _Goblin_ following.
As they approached the mountains, something the shape of a recon-car
and about half the size passed them going in the opposite direction.
As they dropped into the chasm on the other side, another nuclear went
off at the volcano.

When Conn and Fred left the _Goblin_ and boarded the ship, they found
Rodney Maxwell, Captain Poole, and a couple of others on the bridge.
Charley Gatworth, the skipper of the _Vampire_, Morgan Gatworth's son,
was with them, and, imaged in a screen, so was Klem Zareff. One of the
other screens, from a pickup on the _Vampire_, showed the _Dragon_
lying on her side, her turret crushed and her gun, with the
muzzle-brake gone, bent upward. A couple of lorries from the _Lester
Dawes_ were alongside; as Conn watched, a blanket-wrapped body, and
then another, were lowered from the disabled gunboat.

"Fred, how are you and Charley fixed for counter-missiles?" Zareff was
asking. "Get loaded up with them off the ship, as many as you can
carry. Charley, you go up on top of this ridge above, and take cover
where you can watch the mountain. Transmit what you see back to the
ship. Fred, you take a position about a quarter way around from where
you are now. Don't let them send anything over, but don't start
anything yourselves. I'm coming out with everything I can gather up
here; I'll be along myself in a couple of hours, and the rest will be
stringing in after me. In the meantime, Rodney, you're in command."

Well, that settled that. There was one other point, though.

"Colonel," Conn said, "I assume that this spaceport is occupied by one
of these new prospecting companies. We have no right to take it away
from them, have we?"

"They fired on us without warning," Karski said. "They killed Milt,
and it's ten to one Abe won't live either. We owe them something for
that."

"We do, and we'll pay off. Conn, you assume wrong. This gang's been at
the spaceport long enough to get the detection system working and put
the defense batteries on ready. They didn't do that since this
morning, and up to last evening they neglected to file claim. I'll
assume they're on the wrong side of the law. They're outlaws, Conn.
All the raids along the east coast; everybody's blamed them on the
Badlands gangs. I'll admit they're responsible for some of it, but
I'll bet this gang at the spaceport is doing most of it."

That was reasonable. Barathrum was closer to the scene of the worst
outlaw depredations than the Badlands, not more than an hour at Mach
Two. And nobody ever thought of Barathrum as an outlaw hangout. People
rarely thought of Barathrum at all. He liked the idea. The only thing
against it was that he wanted so badly to believe it.

They brought the body of Milt Hennant aboard, and Abe Samuels, swathed
in bandages and immobilized by narcotic injections. A few more of the
_Dragon_'s six-man crew had been injured. Jorrisson, the skipper, had
one trouser leg slit to the belt and his right thigh splinted and
bandaged; he took over the _Lester Dawes_' missile controls, which he
could manage sitting in one place. Fred Karski and Charley Gatworth
went aboard their craft and lifted out.

For a long time, nothing happened. Conn got out the plans of the
volcano spaceport and the photomaps of the surrounding area. The
principal entrance, the front door of the spaceport, was the crater of
the extinct volcano itself. It was ringed, outside, with
launching-sites and gun positions, and according to the data he had,
some of the guns were as big as 250-mm. How many outlaws there were to
man them was a question a lot of people could get killed trying to
answer. The ship docks and shops were down on the level of the crater
floor, in caverns, both natural and excavated, that extended far back
into the mountain. There were two galleries, one above the other,
extending entirely around the inside of the crater near the top;
passages from them gave access to the outside gun and missile
positions.

With a dozen ships the size of the _Lester Dawes_, about five thousand
men, and a CO who wasn't concerned with trivialities like casualties,
they could have taken the place in half an hour. With what they had,
trying to fight their way in at the top was out of the question.

There was another way in. He had known about it from the beginning,
and he was trying desperately to think of a way not to utilize it. It
was a tunnel two miles long, running into some of the bottom workshops
and storerooms back of the ship berths from a big blowhole or small
crater at the foot of the mountain. According to the fifty-year-old
plans, it was big enough to take a gunboat in, and on paper it looked
like a royal highway straight to the heart of the enemy's stronghold.

To Conn, it looked like a wonderful place to commit suicide. He'd only
had a short introductory course, in one semester, in military and
protective robotics, just enough to give him a foundation if he wanted
to go into that branch of the subject later. It was also enough to
give him an idea of the sort of booby-traps that tunnel could be
filled with. He knew what he'd have put into it if he'd been defending
that place.

Colonel Zareff had sent one last message from Force Command when he
lifted off with a flight of recon-cars. After that, he maintained a
communication blackout. It was an hour and a half before he got close
enough to be detected from the outlaw stronghold. Immediately, the
volcano began spewing out missiles. Poole hastily took the _Lester
Dawes_ ten miles down the rift-valley in sixty seconds, while Stefan
Jorisson put out a nuclear-warhead missile and left it circling about
where the ship had been. From their respective positions, Fred Karski
and Charley Gatworth filled the airspace midway to the volcano with
counter-missiles, each loaded with four rockets. There were
explosions, fireballs in the air and rising cumulus clouds of
varicolored smoke and dust. Only about half the enemy missiles reached
the _Lester Dawes'_ former position.

When their controllers, back at the volcano, couldn't see the ship in
their screens, the missiles bunched together. Immediately, Jorisson
sent his missile up to join them and detonated it. Including his own,
eight nuclear weapons went off together in a single blast that shook
the ground like an earthquake and churned the air like a hurricane.
Klem Zareff came on-screen at once.

"Now what did you do?" he demanded. "Blew the whole place up, didn't
you?"

Rodney Maxwell told him. Zareff laughed. "They might just think they
got the ship; all the pickups would be smashed before they could see
what really happened. You're about ten miles south of that? Be with
you in a few minutes."

They got a screen on for his rearview pickup. Zareff had with him a
dozen recon-cars, some of them under robo-control; six gunboats
followed, and behind them, to the horizon, other craft were strung
out--airboats, troop carriers, and freight-scows. They could see enemy
missiles approaching in Zareff's front screen; counter-missiles got
most of them, and a couple of pilotless recon-cars were sacrificed.
The _Lester Dawes_ blasted more missiles as they crossed the top of
the mountain range. Then Zareff's car was circling in and entering at
one of the ship's open cargo-ports. Zareff and Anse Dawes got out.

"Gunboats are only half an hour behind," Zareff said. "Get some
screens on to them, Anse; you know the combinations. Now let's see
what kind of a mess we're in here."

It was almost a miracle, the way the tottering old man Conn had seen
on the dock at Litchfield when he had arrived from Terra had been
rejuvenated.

The rest of the reinforcements arrived slowly, sending missiles and
counter-missiles out ahead of them. Zareff began worrying about the
supply; the enemy didn't seem to be running short. By 1300--Conn noted
the time incredulously; the battle seemed to have been going on
forever, instead of just four hours--the _Lester Dawes_ had moved
halfway around the volcano and was almost due west of it, and the
eight gunboats were spaced all around the perimeter. Then one stopped
transmitting; in the other screens, there was a rising fireball where
she had been. The radio was loud with verbal reports.

"_Poltergeist_," Zareff said, naming half a dozen names. One or two of
them had been schoolmates of Conn's at the Academy; he knew how he'd
feel about it later, but now it simply didn't register.

"They're launching missiles faster than we can shoot them down," he
said.

"That's usually the beginning of the end," Zareff said. "I saw it
happen too often during the War. We've got to get inside that place.
It's a lot of harmless fun to send contragravity robots out to smash
each other, but it doesn't win battles. Battles are won by men,
standing with their feet on the ground, using personal weapons."

"We'll have to win this one pretty soon," Rodney Maxwell said. "The
amount of nuclear energy we've been releasing will be detectable
anywhere on the planet by now. The Government has a ship like the
_Lester Dawes_ in commission; if this keeps on, she'll be coming out
for a look."

"Then we'll have help," Captain Poole said.

"We need Government help like we need the polka-dot fever," Rodney
Maxwell said. "If they get in it, they'll claim the spaceport
themselves, and we'll have fought a battle for nothing."

Well, that was it, then. The spaceport was essential to the Maxwell
Plan. He'd gotten seven men killed--eight, if the recon-car that was
taking Abe Samuels to the hospital in Litchfield didn't make it in
time--and it was up to him to see that they hadn't died for nothing.
He spread the photo-map and the spaceport plans on the chart table.

"Look at this," he said.

Klem Zareff looked at it. He didn't like it any better than Conn had.
He studied the plan for a moment, chewing his cigar.

"You know, it's possible they don't know that thing exists," he said,
without too much conviction. "You'll be betting the lives of at least
twenty men; fewer than that couldn't accomplish anything."

"I'll be putting mine on the table along with them," Conn said. "I'll
lead them in."

He was wishing he hadn't had to say that. He did, though. It was the
only thing he could say.

"You better pick the men to go with me, Colonel," he continued. "You
know them better than I do. We'll need working equipment, too; I have
no idea what we may have to take out of the way, inside."

"I won't call for volunteers," Zareff said. "I'll pick Home Guards;
they did their volunteering when they joined."

"Let me pick one man, Colonel," Anse Dawes said. "I'll pick me."




X


They sent a snooper in first; it picked up faint radiation leakage
from inactive power units of overhead lights, and nothing else. The
tunnel stretched ahead of it, empty, and dark beyond its infrared
vision. After it had gone a mile without triggering anything, the jeep
followed, Anse Dawes piloting and Conn at the snooper controls
watching what it transmitted back. The two lorries followed, loaded
with men and equipment, and another jeep brought up the rear. They had
cut screen-and-radio communication with the outside; they weren't even
using inter-vehicle communication.

At length, the snooper emerged into a big cavern, swinging slowly to
scan it. The walls and ceiling were rough and irregular; it was
natural instead of excavated. Only the floor had been leveled smooth.
There were a lot of things in it, machinery and vehicles, all battered
and in poor condition, dusty and cobwebbed: the spaceport junkheap. A
passage, still large enough for one of the gunboats, led deeper into
the mountain toward the crater. They sent the snooper in and, after a
while, followed.

They came to other rectangular, excavated caverns. On the plans, they
were marked as storerooms. Cases and crates, indeterminate shrouded
objects; some had never been disturbed, but here and there they found
evidence of recent investigation.

Beyond was another passage, almost as wide as the Mall in Litchfield;
even the _Lester Dawes_ could have negotiated it. According to the
plans, it ran straight out to the ship docks and the open crater
beyond. Anse turned the jeep into a side passage, and Conn recalled
the snooper and sent it ahead. On the plan, it led to another natural
cavern, half its width shown as level with the entrance. The other
half was a pit, marked as sixty feet deep; above this and just under
the ceiling, several passages branched out in different directions.

The snooper reported visible light ahead; fluoroelectric light from
one of the upper passages, and firelight from the pit. The
air-analyzer reported woodsmoke and a faint odor of burning oil. He
sent the snooper ahead, tilting it to look down into the pit.

A small fire was burning in the center; around it, in a circle, some
hundred and fifty people, including a few women and children, sat,
squatted or reclined. A low hum of voices came out of the soundbox.

"Who the blazes are they?" Anse whispered. "I can't see any way they
could have gotten down there."

They were in rags, and they weren't armed; there wasn't so much as a
knife or a pistol among them. Conn motioned the lorries and the other
jeep forward.

"Prisoners," he said. "I think they were hauled down here on a scow,
shoved off, and left when the fighting started. Cover me," he told the
men in the lorries. "I'm going down and talk to them."

Somebody below must have heard something. As Anse took the jeep over
and started floating it down, the circle around the fire began moving,
the women and children being pushed to the rear and the men gathering
up clubs and other chance weapons. By the time the jeep grounded, the
men in the pit were standing defensively in front of the women and
children.

They were all dirty and ragged; the men were unshaven. There was a
tall man with a grizzled beard, in greasy coveralls; another man with
a black beard and an old Space Navy uniform, his head bandaged with a
dirty and blood-caked rag; another in the same uniform, wearing a cap
on which the Terran Federation insignia had been replaced by the
emblem of Transcontinent & Overseas Shiplines and the words CHIEF.
And beside the tall man with the gray beard, was a girl
in baggy trousers and a torn smock. Like the others, she was dirty,
but in spite of the rags and filth, Conn saw that she was beautiful.
Black hair, dark eyes, an impudently tilted nose.

They all looked at him in hostility that gradually changed to
perplexity and then hope.

"Who are you?" the tall man with the gray beard asked. "You're none of
this gang here."

"Litchfield Exploration & Salvage; I'm Conn Maxwell."

That meant nothing; none of them had been near a news-screen lately.

"What's going on topside?" the man with the bandaged head and the four
stripes on his sleeve asked. "There was firing, artillery and
nuclears, and they herded us down here. Have you cleaned the bloody
murderers out?"

"We're working on it," Conn said. "I take it they aren't friends of
yours?"

Foolish Question of the Year; they all made that evident.

"They took my ship; they murdered my first officer and half my crew
and passengers...."

"They burned our home and killed our servants," the girl said. "They
kidnapped my father and me...."

"They've been keeping us here as slaves."

"It's the Blackie Perales gang," the tall man with the gray beard
said. "They've been making us work for them, converting a blasted tub
of a contragravity ship into a spacecraft. I beg your pardon, Captain
Nichols; she was a fine ship--for her intended purpose."

"You're Captain Nichols?" Anse Dawes exclaimed. "Of the _Harriet
Barne_?"

"That's right. The _Harriet Barne's_ here; they've been making us work
on her, to convert her to an interplanetary craft, of all idiotic
things."

"My name's Yves Jacquemont," the man with the gray beard said. "I'm a
retired hyperspace maintenance engineer; I had a little business at
Waterville, buying, selling and rebuilding agricultural machinery.
This gang found out about me; they raided and burned our village and
carried me and my daughter, Sylvie, away. We've been working for them
for the last four months, tearing Captain Nichols' ship down and
armoring her with collapsium."

"How many pirates are there here?"

That started an argument. Nobody was quite sure; two hundred and fifty
seemed to be the highest estimate, which Conn decided to play safe by
accepting.

"You get us out of here," Yves Jacquemont was saying. "All we want is
a chance at them."

"How about arms? You can't do much with clubs and fists."

"Don't worry about that; we know where to get arms. The treasure
house, where they store their loot. There's plenty of arms and
ammunition, and anything else you can think of. They've used us to
help stow the stuff; we know where it is."

"Anse, you remember those scows we saw, in the big room before we came
to the broad passage? Take four men in the jeep; have them lift two of
them and bring them here. Then, you get out to the end of the tunnel
and call the _Lester Dawes_. Tell them what's happened, tell them they
can get gunboats all the way in, and wait to guide them when they
arrive."

When Anse turned and climbed into the jeep, he asked Yves Jacquemont:
"Why does this Perales want an interplanetary ship?"

"He's crazy!" Jacquemont swore. "Paranoid; megalomaniac. He talks of
organizing all the pirates and outlaws on the planet into one band and
making himself king. He's heard that there are Space Navy superweapons
on Koshchei--I suppose there are, at that--and he wants to get a lot
of planetbusters and hellburners and annihilators." He lowered his
voice. "Captain Nichols and I were going to fix up something that'd
blow the _Harriet Barne_ up as soon as he got her out of atmosphere."

He talked for a while to Jacquemont and his daughter Sylvie, and to
Nichols and the chief engineer, whose name was Vibart. There was
evidently nothing else at the spaceport of which a spaceship could be
built, but there were foundries and rolling-mills and a
collapsed-matter producer. The _Harriet Barne_ was gutted, half torn
down, and half armored with new collapsium-plated sheet steel. It
might be possible to continue the work on her and take her to space.

Then the two scows floated over the top of the pit and began letting
down. They got the prisoners into them, the combat-effective men in
one and the women and children in the other. At the top, he took over
the remaining jeep, getting Jacquemont, his daughter, and the two
contragravityship officers in with him.

"Up to the top," Jacquemont said. "Take the middle passage, and turn
right at the next intersection."

As they approached the section where the pirates stored their loot,
the sound of guns and explosions grew louder, and they began picking
up radio and screen signals, all of which were scrambled and
incomprehensible. The pirates, in different positions, talking among
themselves. With all that, it ought to be safe to use their own
communication equipment; nobody would notice it.

The treasure room looked like a giant pack rat's nest. Cases and
crates of merchandise, bales, boxes, barrels. Machinery. Household and
industrial robots. The prisoners piled out of the two scows and began
rummaging. Somebody found a case of cigarettes and smashed it open; in
a moment, cartons were being tossed around and opened, and everybody
was smoking. The pirates evidently hadn't issued any tobacco rations
to their prisoners.

And they found arms and ammunition, began ripping open cases, handing
out rifles, pistols, submachine guns. The prisoners grabbed them even
more hungrily than the cigarettes. Sylvie Jacquemont took charge of
the ammunition; she had three men opening boxes for her, while she
passed out boxes of cartridges and made sure that everybody had
ammunition to fit their weapons. A ragged man who might have been a
farm-tramp or a rich planter before his capture had gotten a bale of
cloth open and was tossing rags around while the chief engineer
inspected weapons and showed people how to clean out the cosmoline and
fill their spare magazines.

Conn collected a few of his own party.

"Let's look these robots over," he said. "Find about half a dozen we
can load with blasting explosive and send ahead of us on
contragravity."

They found several--an electric-light servicer, a couple of
wall-and-window washers, a serving-robot that looked as if it had come
from a restaurant, and an all-purpose robo-janitor. In the passage
outside, they began loading the lorries with bricks of ionite and
packages of cataclysmite, packing all the scrap-iron and other junk
around the explosives that they could. As soon as they had weapons,
the prisoners came swarming out, making more noise than was necessary
and a good deal more than was safe. Sylvie Jacquemont, with a
submachine gun slung from one shoulder and a canvas bag of spare
magazines from the other, came over to see what he was doing.

"Well, look what you're doing to him!" she mock-reproached. "That's a
dirty trick to play on a little robot!"

He grinned at her. "You and my mother would get along. She always
treats robots like people."

"Well, they are, sort of. They aren't alive--at least, I don't think
they are--but they do what you tell them, and they learn tricks, and
they have personalities."

That was true. He didn't think robots were alive, either, though
biophysics professors tended to become glibly evasive when pinned down
to defining life. Robots could learn, if you used the term loosely
enough. And any robot with more than five hundred hours service picked
up a definite and often exasperating personality.

"I've been working with them, and tearing them down and fixing them,
ever since I was in pigtails," she added.

The half-dozen natural leaders among the prisoners--Jacquemont and his
daughter, the two _Harriet Barne_ officers, and a couple of
others--bent over the photoprinted plans Conn had, located their
position, and told him as much as they could about what lay ahead.
Sylvie Jacquemont could handle robots; she would ride in the front
seat of the jeep while he piloted. Vibart, the chief engineer, and
Yves Jacquemont would ride behind. Nichols would ride in the scow with
the fighting men. One lorry of his own party would follow the jeep;
the other would bring up the rear.

He snapped on the screen and punched the ship combination. Stefan
Jorisson appeared in it.

"Hi, Conn! You all right?" He raised his voice. "Conn's on-screen!"

His father appeared at Jorisson's shoulder and, a moment later, Klem
Zareff.

"Well, we're in, all right," he said. "We just picked up an army,
too." He swung the jeep to get the crowd in the pickup, explaining who
they were. "Did you hear from Anse?"

"Yes, he just screened in," Rodney Maxwell said. "He said a gunboat
can get in."

"That's right; clear into the crater."

"Well, we're going to put three of them inside," Zareff told him.
"_Werewolf_, _Zombi_, and _Dero_. And a troop carrier with fifty men;
flamethrowers, portable machine guns, bomb-launchers; regular
special-weapons section. What can you do where you are?"

"Here? Nothing. We're going to work around to the other side of the
crater, and then find a vertical shaft and go up topside and make as
much disturbance as we can."

"That's it!" Zareff approved. "Pull them off balance; as soon as we
get in, we'll go straight to the top. Look for us in about an hour;
it's going to take time getting to the tunnel-mouth without being
spotted from above."

He lifted the jeep and started off; the lorry, and the scows and the
other lorry, followed; the snooper and the bomb-robots went ahead like
a pack of hunting dogs. They went through great chambers, dark and
silent and bulking with dusty machines. Jacquemont explained that the
prisoners had never gotten into this section; the _Harriet Barne_ was
a mile or so to their right. Conn turned left, when the noise of
firing from outside became plainer. A foundry. A machine-shop which
seemed to have been abandoned in the middle of some rush job that
hadn't really been necessary. They came to a place even the snooper
couldn't enter, choked to the ceiling with dead vegetation, hydroponic
seed-plants that had been left untended to grow wild and die. They
emerged into outside light, in vast caves a mile high and open onto
the crater, and looked across the floor that had been leveled and
vitrified to the other side, three and a half miles away.

He didn't know whether to be more awed by the original eruption that
had formed the crater or by the engineering feat of carving these
docks and ship-berths, big enough for the hugest hyperspaceship, into
it.

At first, he had been afraid of getting into position too soon before
the task force from outside could profit by the diversion. Then he
began to worry about the time it was taking to get halfway around the
crater. He could hear artillery thundering continuously above. Except
at the very beginning of the battle, there had been little gunfire. He
wondered if both sides were running out of lift-and-drive missiles, or
if the fighting had gotten too close for anybody to risk using nuclear
weapons.

He was also worrying about the women and children among the released
prisoners.

"Why did the pirates bother with them?" he asked Sylvie.

"They used the women and some of the old men to do housekeeping
chores for them," she said. "Mostly, though, they were hostages; if
the men didn't work, Perales threatened to punish the women and
children. I wasn't doing any housework; I'm too good a mechanic. I was
helping on the ship."

"Well, what'll I do with them when the fighting starts? I can't take
them into battle."

"You'll have to; it'll be the safest place for them. You can't leave
them anywhere and risk having them recaptured."

"That means we'll have to detach some men to cover them, and that'll
cut our striking force down." He whistled at the sound-pickup of his
screen and told his father about it. "What do I do with these people,
anyhow?"

"You're the officer in command, Conn," his father told him. "Your
decision. How soon can you attack? We're almost through to the
crater."

"There's a vertical shaft right above us, and a lot of noise at the
top. We'll send up a couple of bomb-robots to clear things at the
shaft-head and follow with everything we have."

"Noncombatants and all?"

He nodded. "Only thing we can do." An old quotation occurred to him.
"'If you want to make an omelet, you have to break eggs.'"

He wondered who'd said that in the first place. One of the old
Pre-Atomic conquerors; maybe Hitler. No, Hitler would have said, "If
you want to make sauerkraut, you have to chop cabbage." Maybe it was
Caesar.

"We'd better send Gumshoe Gus up, first," Sylvie suggested.

"You handle him. Take a quick look around, and then pull him back.
We'll need him later." It was the first time he'd ever caught himself
calling a robot "him," instead of "it." He thought for a second, and
added: "Give your father and Mr. Vibart the controls for the two
window-washers; you handle the snooper."

He gave more instructions: Yves Jacquemont to turn his bomb-robot
right, Vibart to turn his left; the two lorries to follow the jeep up
the shaft, the scows to follow. Then he leaned back and looked at the
screens that had been rigged under the top of the jeep. A circle of
light appeared in one, growing larger and brighter as the snooper
approached the top of the shaft; two more came on as the bomb-robots
followed.

"All right; follow me," he said into the inter-vehicle radio, and
started the jeep slowly up the shaft.

The snooper popped out of the shaft, onto a gallery that had been cut
into the solid rock, fifty feet high and a hundred and fifty across,
with a low parapet on the outside and the mile-deep crater beyond.
There were a few grounded aircars and lorries in sight, and a medium
airboat rested a hundred or so feet on the right of the shaft-opening.
Fifteen or twenty men were clustered around it, with a lifter loaded
with ammunition. They looked like any crowd of farm-tramps. Suddenly,
one of them saw the snooper, gave a yell, and fired at it with a
rifle. Sylvie pulled it back into the shaft; her father and the chief
engineer sent the two bomb-robots up onto the gallery. The right-hand
robot sped at the airboat; the last thing Conn saw in its screen was a
face, bearded and villainous and contorted with fright, looking out
the pilot's window of the airboat. Then it went dead, and there was a
roar from above. On the other side, several men were firing straight
at the pickup of the other robot; it went dead, too, and there was a
second explosion.

In the communication screen, somebody was yelling, "Give them another
one for Milt Hennant!" and his father was urging him to get in fast,
before they recovered.

In peace or war, screen communication was a wonderful thing. The only
trouble was that it let in too many kibitzers.

The gallery, when the jeep emerged onto it, was empty except for
casualties, a few still alive. The side of the airboat was caved in;
the lifter-load of ammunition had gone up with the bomb. He moved the
jeep to the right of the shaft and waited for the vehicles behind him,
suffering a brief indecision.

  _Never divide your force in the presence of the enemy._

There had been generals who had done that and gotten away with it, but
they'd had names like Foxx Travis and Robert E. Lee and
Napoleon--Napoleon; that was who'd made that crack about omelets!
They'd known what they were doing. He was playing this battle by ear.

There was a lot of shouting ahead to the right. That meant live
pirates, a deplorable situation which ought to be corrected at once.
The communication screen was noisy, now; his father had gotten to the
top gallery with the three gun cutters, and was meeting resistance. He
formed his column, his jeep and one of the lorries in front, the scows
next, and the second lorry behind, and started around the gallery
counterclockwise, the snoopers and the three remaining bomb-robots
ahead. They began running into resistance almost at once.

Bullets spatted on the armor glass in front of him, spalling it and
blotching it with metal until he found that he could steer better by
the show-back of his view-pickup. He used that until the pickup was
shot out. Then his father began wanting to know, from the
communication screen, what was going on and where he was. A bomb or
something went off directly under the jeep, bouncing it almost to the
ceiling; he found that it was impossible to lift it again after it
settled to the floor of the gallery, and they all piled out to fight
on foot. Sommers and his gang from the number one lorry were also
afoot; their vehicle had been disabled. He saw them lifting wounded
into one of the scows.

They blew up the light-service robot to clear a nest of pirates who
had taken cover ahead of them. They sent the robo-janitor up a side
passage and exploded it in a missile-launching position on the outside
of the mountain; that produced a tremendous explosion. They began
running out of cartridges, and had to stop and glean more from enemy
casualties. They expended their last bomb-robot, the restaurant
server, to break up another pirate resistance point.

At length he found himself, with Sylvie and her father and one of the
Home Guardsmen from Sommers' lorry, lying behind an aircar somebody
had knocked out with a bazooka, with two dead pirates for company and
a dozen distressingly live ones ahead behind an improvised barricade.
Behind, there was frantic firing; the rear-guard seemed to have run
into trouble, probably from some gang that had come down from the
upper level. He wondered what his father was doing with the gunboats;
since abandoning the jeep, he had lost his only means of contact.

Suddenly, the men in front jumped up from their barricade and came
running toward him. Been reinforced, now they're counterattacking. His
rifle was empty; he drew his pistol and shot one of them, and then he
saw that they were throwing up their hands and yelling for quarter.
This was something new.

He looked around quickly, to make sure none of the liberated prisoners
except Jacquemont and his daughter were around, and then called to a
couple of his own men to come up and help him. While they were
relieving the pirates of their pistol belts and cartridge bandoliers,
more came up, their hands over their heads, herded by a combat car
from which Tom Brangwyn covered them with a pair of 12-mm machine
guns. Tom hadn't put in an appearance before he had taken his commando
force into the tunnel; he hadn't even known the chief of Company
Police was on Barathrum.

"Well, nice seeing you," he greeted. "How did you get in?"

"Over the top," Brangwyn told him. "Everything's caved in on the other
side. We have a quarter of the top gallery, and half of this one. Your
father's cleaning up above. Klem's got some men working along the
outside."

Sylvie was tugging at his arm. "Hey, look! Look at that!" she was
clamoring. "Who's she belong to?"

He looked; the _Lester Dawes_ was coming over the edge of the crater.

"She's ours," he said. "It's all over but the mopping up. And counting
the egg breakage."




XI


The shooting died down to occasional rattles of small arms, usually
followed by yells for quarter. An explosion thundered from across the
crater. The _Lester Dawes_ fired her big guns a few times. A machine
gun stuttered. A pistol banged, far away. It took two hours before all
the pirates had been hunted out of hiding and captured, or killed if
found by their former captives, who were accepting no surrender
whatever.

Blackie Perales had been one of the latter; he had been found, his
clothes in rags and covered with dirt and grease, hiding under a
machine in one of the shops back of the dock in which the _Harriet
Barne_ was being rebuilt. He had tried to claim that he was one of the
pirates' prisoners who had eluded the roundup at the beginning of the
battle and had been hiding there since. As soon as the real prisoners
saw and recognized him, they had fallen upon him and clubbed, kicked
and stamped him out of any resemblance to humanity. At that, what he
got was probably only a fraction of what he deserved.

The egg breakage had been heavy, and not at all confined to the bad
eggs. A third gunboat, the _Banshee_, had been destroyed with all
hands during the final attack from outside; in addition, a dozen men
had been killed during the fighting in the galleries. Everybody was
shocked, except Klem Zareff, who had been in battles before. He was
surprised that the casualties had been so light.

At first glance, the spaceport looked like a handsome prize of
victory. The docks and workshops were all in good condition; at worst,
they only needed cleaning up. There was a collapsium plant, with its
own mass-energy converter. There were foundries and machine-shops and
forging-shops and a rolling-mill, almost completely robotic. At first,
Conn thought that it might be possible to build a hyperdrive ship
here, without having to go to Koshchei at all.

Closer examination disabused him of this hope. There was nothing of
which the framework of a ship could be built, and no way of producing
heavy structural steel. The rolling-mill was good enough to turn out
eighth-inch sheet material which when plated with a few micromicrons
of collapsium would be as good as a hundred feet of lead against
space-radiations, but that was the ship's skin. A ship needed a
skeleton, too. The only thing to do was go on with the _Harriet
Barne_.

It was sunset before he finished his tour of inspection and let his
jeep down in a vehicle hall off the lower gallery outside what had
originally been the spaceport officers' club. It was crowded, and a
victory celebration seemed to be getting under way. He saw his father
with Yves Jacquemont, Sylvie, Tom Brangwyn, and Captain Nichols.
Nichols had gotten clean clothes from the pirates' store of loot, and
had bathed and shaved. So had Jacquemont, though he had contented
himself with trimming his beard. It took him a second or so to
recognize the young lady in feminine garb as his erstwhile battle
comrade, Sylvie.

"Well, our pay goes on from the day we were captured," Nichols was
saying. "My instructions are to resume command of the ship. Tomorrow,
they're sending a party out to go over her."

Conn stopped short. "What's this about the ship?"

"Captain Nichols was in screen contact with his company's office in
Storisende," Rodney Maxwell said. "They're continuing him in command
of her."

"But ... but we took that ship! We lost three gunboats and about
twenty-five men...."

"She still belongs to Transcontinent & Overseas," his father said.
"That's been the law on stolen property as long as there's been any
law."

Of course; he should have known that. Did know it; just didn't think.

"We broke an awful lot of eggs for no omelet; fought a battle for
nothing."

"Well, of course, I'm prejudiced," Sylvie said, "but I don't think
getting us out of the hands of that bloodthirsty maniac and his
cutthroats was nothing."

"Wiping out the Perales gang wasn't nothing, Conn," Tom Brangwyn said.
"You got no idea at all how bad things were, the last couple of
years."

"I know. I'm sorry." He was ashamed of himself. "But I needed a ship,
and now we have no ship at all."

"A ship means something to you?" Yves Jacquemont asked.

"Yes." He told him why. "If we could get to Koshchei, we could build a
hypership of our own, and get our brandy and things to markets where
we could get a decent price for them."

"I know. I was in and out of Storisende on these owner-captain tramps
for a couple of years before I decided to retire and settle here,"
Jacquemont said. "The profit on a cargo of Poictesme brandy on Terra
or Baldur is over a thousand percent."

"Well, don't give up too soon," Nichols advised. "You can't keep the
_Harriet Barne_, of course, but you're entitled to prize-money on her,
and that ought to buy you something you could build a spaceship out
of."

"That's right," Jacquemont said. "Everything else besides the frame
can be made here. Look, these pirates burned me out; except for the
money I have in the bank, I lost everything, home, business and all.
As soon as I can find a place for Sylvie to stay, I'll come back and
go to work for your company building a spaceship. And a lot of the men
who were working here are farm-tramps and drifters, one job's as good
as another as long as they get paid for it. And I know a few good men
in Storisende--engineers--who'd be glad for a job, too."

"You think it would be all right with Mother and Flora if Sylvie
stayed with us?" Conn asked.

"Of course it would; they'd be glad to have her." Rodney Maxwell
turned to Yves Jacquemont. "Let's consider that fixed up. Now,
suppose you and I go into Storisende, and...."

The Transcontinent & Overseas people arrived at Barathrum Spaceport
the next morning; a rear-rank vice-president, a front-rank
legal-eagle, and three engineers. They were horrified at what they
saw. The _Harriet Barne_ had been gutted. Bulkheads and decks had
been ripped out and relocated incomprehensibly; the bridge and the
control room under it were gone; she had been stripped to her framework,
and the whole underside was sheathed in shimmering collapsium.

"Great Ghu!" the vice-president almost howled. "That isn't _our_
ship!"

"That's the _Harriet Barne_," her captain said. "She looks a little
ragged now, but--"

"You helped these pirates do this to her?"

"If I hadn't, they'd have cut my throat and gotten somebody else to
help them. My throat's more valuable to me than the ship is to you; I
can't get anybody to build me a new one."

"Well, understand," one of the engineers said, "they were converting
her into an interplanetary ship. It wouldn't cost much to finish the
job."

"We need an interplanetary ship like we need a hole in the head!" The
vice-president turned to Rodney Maxwell. "Just how much prize-money do
you think you're entitled to for this wreck?"

"I wouldn't know; that's up to Sterber, Flynn & Chen-Wong. Up to the
court, if we can settle it any other way."

"You mean you'd litigate about this?" the lawyer demanded, and began
to laugh.

"If we have to. Look, if you people don't want her, sign her over to
Litchfield Exploration & Salvage. But if you do want her, you'll have
to pay for her."

"We'll give you twenty thousand sols," the lawyer said. "We don't want
to be tightfisted. After all, you fought a gang of pirates and lost
some men and a couple of boats; we have some moral obligation to you.
But you'll have to realize that this ship, in her present state, is
practically valueless."

"The collapsium on her is worth twice that, and the engines are worth
even more," Jacquemont said. "I worked on them."

The discussion ended there. By midafternoon, Luther Chen-Wong, the
junior partner of the law firm, arrived from Storisende with a couple
of engineers of his own. Reporters began arriving; both sides were
anxious to keep them away from the ship. Conn took care of them,
assisted by Sylvie, who had rummaged an even more attractive costume
out of what she called the loot-cellar. The reporters all used up a
lot of film footage on her. And the Fawzis' Office Gang arrived from
Force Command, bitterly critical of the value of the spaceport against
its cost in lives and equipment. Brangwyn and Zareff returned to Force
Command with them. A Planetary Air Patrol ship arrived and removed the
captured pirates. The liberated prisoners were airlifted to
Litchfield.

The third day after the battle, Conn and his father and Sylvie and her
father flew to Litchfield. To Conn's surprise, Flora greeted him
cordially, and Wade Lucas, rather stiffly, congratulated him. Maybe it
was as Tom Brangwyn had said; he hadn't been on Poictesme in the last
four or five years and didn't know how bad things had gotten. His
mother seemed to think he had won the Battle of Barathrum
single-handed.

He was even more surprised and gratified that Flora made friends with
Sylvie immediately. His mother, however, regarded the engineer's
daughter with badly concealed hostility, and seemed to doubt that
Sylvie was the kind of girl she wanted her son getting involved with.
Outwardly, of course, she was quite gracious.

Rodney Maxwell and Yves Jacquemont flew to Storisende the next
morning, both more optimistic about finding a ship than Conn thought
the circumstances warranted. Conn stayed at home for the next few
days, luxuriating in idleness. He and Sylvie tore down his mother's
household robots and built sound-sensors into them, keying them to
respond to their names and to a few simple commands, and including
recorded-voice responses in a thick Sheshan accent. All the smart
people on Terra, he explained, had Sheshan humanoid servants.

His mother was delighted. Robots that would answer when she spoke to
them were a lot more companionable. She didn't seem to think, however,
that Sylvie's mechanical skills were ladylike accomplishments. Nice
girls, Litchfield model, weren't quite so handy with a spot-welder.
That was what Conn liked about Sylvie; she was like the girls he'd
known at the University.

They were strolling after dinner, down the Mall. The air was sharp and
warned that autumn had definitely arrived; the many brilliant stars,
almost as bright as the moon of Terra, were coming out in the dusk.

"Conn, this thing about Merlin," she began. "Do you really believe in
it? Ever since Dad and I came to Poictesme, I've been hearing about
it, but it's just a story, isn't it?"

He was tempted to tell her the truth, and sternly put the temptation
behind him.

"Of course there's a Merlin, Sylvie, and it's going to do wonderful
things when we find it."

He looked down the starlit Mall ahead of him. Somebody, maybe Lester
Dawes and Morgan Gatworth and Lorenzo Menardes, had gotten things
finished and cleaned up. The pavement was smooth and unbroken; the
litter had vanished.

"It's done wonderful things already, just because people started
looking for it," he said. "Some of these days, they're going to
realize that they had Merlin all along and didn't know it."

There was a faint humming from somewhere ahead, and he was wondering
what it was. Then they came to the long escalators, and he saw that
they were running.

"Why, look! They got them fixed! They're running!"

Sylvie grinned at him and squeezed his arm.

"I get you, chum," she said. "Of course there's a Merlin."

Maybe he didn't have to tell her the truth.

When they returned to the house, his mother greeted him:

"Conn, your father's been trying to get you ever since you went out.
Call him, right away; Ritz-Gartner Hotel, in Storisende. It's
something about a ship."

It look a little time to get his father on-screen. He was excited and
happy.

"Hi, Conn; we have one," he said.

"What kind of a ship?"

"You know her. The _Harriet Barne_."

That he hadn't expected. Something off Mothball Row that would have to
be flown to Barathrum and torn down and completely rebuilt, but not
the one that was there already, partly finished.

"How the dickens did you wangle that?"

"Oh, it was Yves' idea, to start with. He knew about her; the T. &
O.'s been losing money on her for years. He said if they had to pay
prize-money on her and then either restore her to original condition
or finish the job and build a spaceship they didn't want, it would
almost bankrupt the company. They got up as high as fifty thousand
sols for prize-money and we just laughed at them. So we made a
proposition of our own.

"We proposed organizing a new company, subsidiary to both L. E. & S.
and T. & O., to engage in interplanetary shipping; both companies to
assign their equity in the _Harriet Barne_ to the new company, the
work of completing her to be done at our spaceport and the labor cost
to be shared. This would give us our spaceship, and get T. & O. off
the hook all around. Everybody was for it except the president of T. &
O. Know anything about him?"

Conn shook his head. His father continued:

"Name's Jethro Sastraman. He could play Scrooge in _Christmas Carol_
without any makeup at all. He hasn't had a new idea since he got out
of college, and that was while the War was still going on.
'Preposterous; utterly visionary and impractical,'" his father
mimicked. "Fortunately, a majority of the big stockholders didn't
agree; they finally bullied him into agreeing. We're calling the new
company Alpha-Interplanetary, we have an application for charter in,
and that'll go through almost automatically."

"Who's going to be the president of this new company?"

"You know him. Character named Rodney Maxwell. Yves is going to be
vice-president in charge of operations; he's flying to Barathrum
tomorrow or the next day with a gang of technicians we're recruiting.
T. & O. are giving us Clyde Nichols and Mack Vibart, and a lot of men
from their shipyard. I'm staying here in Storisende; we're opening an
office here. By this time next week, we're all going to wish we'd been
born quintuplets."

"And Conn Maxwell, I suppose, will be an influential
non-office-holding stockholder?"

"That's right. Just like in L. E. & S."




XII


He found Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes and a score of workmen making a
survey and inventory of the spaceport. Captain Nichols and four of the
original crew of the _Harriet Barne_, who had shared his captivity
among the pirates, had stayed to take care of the ship. And Fred
Karski, with one gun-cutter and a couple of light airboats, was
keeping up a routine guard. All of them had heard about the formation
of Alpha-Interplanetary when Conn arrived.

The next day, Yves Jacquemont arrived, accompanied by Mack Vibart, a
gang from the T. & O. shipyard, and a dozen engineers and construction
men whom he had recruited around Storisende. More workers arrived in
the next few days, including a number who had already worked on the
ship as slaves of the Perales gang.

It didn't take Conn long to appreciate the problems involved in the
conversion. Built to operate only inside planetary atmosphere and
gravitation, the _Harriet Barne_ was long and narrow, like an old
ocean ship; more than anything else, she had originally resembled a
huge submarine. Spaceships, either interplanetary or interstellar,
were always spherical with a pseudogravity system at the center. This,
of course, the _Harriet Barne_ lacked.

"Well, are we going to make the whole trip in free fall?" he wanted to
know.

"No, we'll use our acceleration for pseudograv halfway, and
deceleration the other half," Jacquemont told him. "We'll be in free
fall about ten or fifteen hours. What we're going to have to do will
be to lift off from Poictesme in the horizontal position the ship was
designed for, and then make a ninety-degree turn after we're
off-planet, with our lift and our drive working together, just like
one of the old rocket ships before the Abbott Drive was developed."

That meant, of course, that the after bulkheads would become decks,
and explained a lot of the oddities he had noticed about the
conversion job. It meant that everything would have to be mounted on
gimbals, everything stowed so as to be secure in either position, and
nothing placed where it would be out of reach in either.

Jacquemont and Nichols took charge of the work on the ship herself.
Chief Engineer Vibart, with a gang of half-taught, self-taught and
untaught helpers, went back to working the engines over, tearing out
all the safety devices that were intended to keep the ship inside
planetary atmosphere, and arranging the lift engines so that they
could be swung into line with the drive engines. There was a lot of
cybernetic and robotic equipment, and astrogational equipment, that
had to be made from scratch. Conn picked a couple of helpers and went
to work on that.

From time to time, he was able to snatch a few minutes to read
teleprint papers or listen to audiovisual newscasts from Storisende.
He was always disappointed. There was much excitement about the new
interplanetary company, but the emphasis was all wrong. People weren't
interested in getting hyperships built, or opening the mines and
factories on Koshchei, or talking about all the things now in short
supply that could be produced there. They were talking about Merlin,
and they were all positive, now, that something found at Force Command
Duplicate had convinced Litchfield Exploration & Salvage that the
giant computer was somewhere off-planet.

Rodney Maxwell flew in from Storisende; he was accompanied by Wade
Lucas, who shook hands cordially with Conn.

"Can you spare us Jerry Rivas for a while?" Rodney Maxwell asked.

"Well, ask Yves Jacquemont; he's vice-president in charge of
operations. As an influential non-office-holding stockholder, I'd
think so. He's only running around helping out here and there."

"We want him to take charge of opening those hospitals you were
telling us about. Wade and I are forming a new company, Mainland
Medical Materials, Ltd. Going to act as broker for L. E. & S. in
getting rid of medical stores. Nobody in the company knows where to
sell that stuff or what we ought to get for it."

Wade Lucas began to talk about how desperately some types of drug and
some varieties of diagnostic equipment were needed. Conn had it on the
tip of his tongue to ask Lucas whether he thought that was a racket,
too. Lucas must have read his mind.

"I really didn't understand how much good this would do," he said. "I
wouldn't have spoken so forcefully against it if I had. I thought it
was nothing but this Merlin thing--"

"Aaagh! Don't talk to me about Merlin!" Conn interrupted. "I have to
talk to Kurt Fawzi and that crowd about Merlin till I'm sick of the
whole subject."

His father shot him a warning glance; Lucas was looking at him in
surprise. He hastened to change the subject:

"I see Len made you a suit out of that material," he said to his
father. "And I see you're not bulging the coat out behind with a
hip-holster."

"Oh, I stopped carrying a gun; I'm a city man, now. Nobody carries one
in Storisende. Won't even be necessary in Litchfield before long. Our
new marshal had a regular reign of terror in Tramptown for a few days,
and you wouldn't know the place. Wade, here, is acting mayor now."

They went back to talking about the new company. "You're going to have
so many companies you won't be able to to keep track of them before
long," Conn said.

"Well, I'm doing something about that. A holding company; Trisystem
Investments, Ltd.; you're a non-office-holding stockholder in that,
too."

Merlin was now a political issue. A bill had been introduced in
Parliament to amend the Abandoned Property Act of 867 and nationalize
Merlin, when and if discovered and regardless by whom. The support
seemed to come from an extremist minority; everybody else, including
the Administration, was opposed to it. There was considerable
acrimony, however, on the propositions: 1) that Merlin was too
important to the prosperity of Poictesme to become a private monopoly;
and 2) that Merlin was too important, etc., to become a political
football and patronage plum.

It was discovered, after they were half assembled, that the controls
for the _Harriet Barne_ would only work while she was in a horizontal
position. The whole thing had to be torn out and rebuilt. There was
also trouble with the air-and-water recycling system. The _City of
Nefertiti_ came in from Aton for Odin; Rodney Maxwell was almost
frantic because they hadn't gotten together a cargo of medical stores
from the first hospital to be opened.

"There's all sorts of stuff," he was fuming, by screen. "Stuff that's
in short supply anywhere and that we could get good prices for
off-planet. Get Federation sols for it, too."

"The _City of Asgard_ will be along in six months," Conn said. "You
can have a real cargo assembled by then. You can make arrangements in
advance to dispose of it on Terra or Baldur or Marduk."

"There are a couple of other companies interested in interplanetary
ships now," his father added. "One of them had gotten four old
freighters off Mothball Row, and they're tearing them down and
cannibalizing them into one spaceship. That work's being done here at
Storisende Spaceport. And another company has gotten title to a couple
of old office buildings and has a gang at work dismantling them for
the structural steel. I think they're going to build a real
spaceship."

That wasn't anything to worry about either. The _Harriet Barne_ was
better than half finished. There was a collapsium plant at Storisende
Spaceport, but Yves Jacquemont said it was only half the size of the
one at Barathrum; it would be three months before it could produce
armor for one, let alone both, ships.

The crackpots were getting into the act, now, too. A spirit medium on
the continent of Acaire, to the north, had produced a communication
purporting to originate with a deceased Third Force Staff officer, now
in the Spirit World. There was considerable detail, all ludicrous to
Conn's professional ear. And a fanatic in one of the small towns on
the west coast was quoting the Bible, the Koran, and the Bhagavadgita
to prove that if Merlin were ever found, Divine vengeance in a
spectacular form would fall not only on Poictesme but on the entire
Galaxy.

The spaceship that was building at Storisende got into the news;
on-screen, it appeared that the work was progressing rapidly. So was
the work of demolishing a block of empty buildings to get girders for
the second ship, on which work had not yet been started. The one under
construction seemed to be of cruciform design, like an old-fashioned
pre-contragravity winged airplane. The design puzzled everybody at
Barathrum. Yves Jacquemont thought that perhaps there would be decks
in the cross-arm which would be used when the ship was running on
combined lift and drive.

"Well, till we can get a shipyard going on Koshchei and build some
real spaceships, there are going to be some rare-looking objects
traveling around the Alpha System. I wonder what the next one's going
to look like--a flying sky-scraper?" Conn said.

"What I wonder," Yves Jacquemont replied, "is where all the old
interplanetary ships got to. There must have been hundreds of them
running back and forth from here to Janicot and Koshchei and Jurgen
and Horvendile during the War. They must have gone somewhere."

"Couldn't they all have been fitted with Dillingham hyperdrive
engines and used in the evacuation?"

"Possible. But the average interplanetary ship isn't very big; five
hundred to seven-fifty feet in diameter. One of those things couldn't
carry more than a couple of hundred people, after you put in all the
supplies and the hydroponic tanks and carniculture vats and so on for
a four- to six-month voyage. I can't see the economy of altering
anything that small for interstellar work. Why, the smallest of these
tramp freighters that come in here will run about fifteen hundred
feet."

They didn't just disintegrate when peace broke out, that was for sure.
And there certainly weren't any of them left on Poictesme. He puzzled
over it briefly, then shoved it aside. He had more important things to
think about.

In his spare time he was studying, along with his other work,
everything he could find on Koshchei, with an intensity he had not
given to anything since cramming for examinations at the University.
There was a lot of it.

The fourth planet of Alpha Gartner was older than Poictesme;
geologists claimed that it was the oldest thing, the sun excepted, in
the system, and astrophysicists were far from convinced that it hadn't
been captured from either Beta or Gamma when the three stars had been
much closer together. It had certainly been formed at a much higher
temperature than Janicot or Poictesme or Jurgen or Horvendile. For
better than a billion years, it had been molten-hot, and it had lost
most of its lighter elements in gaseous form along with its primary
atmosphere, leaving little to form a light-rock crust. All that had
remained had been a core of almost pure iron and a mantle that was
mostly high-grade iron ore.

The same process had gone on, as it cooled, as on any Terra-size
planet. After the surface had started to congeal, gases, mostly carbon
dioxide and water vapor, had come up to form a secondary atmosphere,
the water vapor forming a cloud envelope, condensing, and sending down
rain that returned immediately as steam. Solar radiations and electric
discharges broke some of that into oxygen and hydrogen; most of the
hydrogen escaped into space. Finally, the surface cooled further and
the rain no longer steamed off.

The whole planet started to rust. It had been rusting, slowly, for the
billion or so years that had followed, and almost all the free oxygen
had become locked in iron oxide. The air was almost pure carbon
dioxide. It would have been different if life had ever appeared on
Koshchei, but apparently the right amino acids never assembled. Some
attempts had been made to introduce vegetation after the colonization
of Poictesme, but they had all failed.

Men went to Koshchei; they worked out of doors in oxygen helmets, and
lived in airtight domes and generated their own oxygen. There had been
mines, and smelters, and blast furnaces and steel mills. And there had
been shipyards, where hyperships up to three thousand feet had been
built. They had all been abandoned when the War had ended; they were
waiting there, on an empty, lifeless planet. Some of them had been
built by the Third Fleet-Army Force during the War; most of them dated
back almost a century before that, to the original industrial boom.
All of them could be claimed under the Abandoned Property Act of 867,
since all had been taken over by the Federation, and the original
owners, or their heirs, compensated.

And there was the matter of selecting a crew. As an influential
non-office-holding stockholder in all the companies involved, Conn
Maxwell, of course, would represent them. He would also serve as
astrogator. Clyde Nichols would command the ship in atmosphere, and
act as first mate in space. Mack Vibart would be chief engineer at all
times. Yves Jacquemont would be first officer under Nichols, and
captain outside atmosphere. They had three real space crewmen, named
Roddell, Youtsko and O'Keefe, who had been in Storisende jail as a
result of a riotous binge when their ship had lifted out, six months
before. The rest of the company--Jerry Rivas, Anse Dawes, Charley
Gatworth, Mohammed Matsui, and four other engineers, Ludvyckson,
Gomez, Karanja and Retief--rated as ordinary spacemen for the trip,
and would do most of the exploration work after landing.

They got the controls put up; they would work in either position. The
engines were lifted in and placed. Conn finished the robo-pilot and
the astrogational computers and saw them installed. The air-and-water
recycling system went in. The collapsium armor went on. In the
news-screen, they saw the spaceship at Storisende still far from half
finished, with swarms of heavy-duty lifters and contragravity
machiners around it, and a set of landing-stands, on which the second
ship was to be built, in the process of construction.

A tramp hyperspace freighter landed at Storisende, the _Andromeda_,
five months from Terra, with a cargo of general merchandise. Rodney
Maxwell and Wade Lucas had assembled a cargo of medicines and hospital
equipment which they thought could be sold profitably. They began
dickering with the owner-captain of the hypership.

A farm-tramp down in the tobacco country to the south, evidently
ignorant that the former commander of the Third Force was still alive,
had proclaimed himself to be the reincarnation of Foxx Travis and was
forbidding everybody, on pain of court-martial and firing squad, from
meddling with Merlin. And an evangelist in the west was declaring that
Merlin was really Satan in mechanical shape.

The _Harriet Barne_ was finished. The first test, lifting her to three
hundred miles, turning her bow-up, and taking her another thousand
miles, had been a success. They brought her back and set her down in
the middle of the crater, and began getting the supplies aboard. Kurt
Fawzi, Klem Zareff, Judge Ledue, Franz Veltrin and the others flew
over from Force Command. Sylvie Jacquemont came from Litchfield, and
so did Wade Lucas, Morgan Gatworth, Lester Dawes, Lorenzo Menardes and
a number of others. Neither Conn's mother nor sister came.

"I don't know what's the matter with those two," Sylvie told him.
"They always seem to be scrapping with each other now, and the only
thing they can agree on is that you and your father ought to stop
whatever you're doing, right away. Your mother can't adjust to your
father being a big Storisende businessman, and she says he'll lose
every centisol he has and both of you will probably go to jail, and
then she's afraid you will find Merlin, and Flora's sure you and your
father are swindling everybody on the planet."

"Sylvie, I had no idea things would be like that," he told her
contritely. "I wish I hadn't suggested that you stay there, now."

"Oh, it isn't so bad, so far. Your mother and I get along all right
when Flora isn't there, and Flora and I get along when your mother
isn't around. Mealtimes aren't much fun, though."

His father came out from Storisende, looked the ship over, and seemed
relieved.

"I'm glad you're ready to get off," he said. "You know this hyperspace
freighter, the _Andromeda_? Some private group in Storisende has
chartered her. She's loading supplies now. I have a private detective
agency, Barton-Massarra, trying to find out where's she's going. I
think you'd better get this ship off, right away."

"We have everything aboard, all the supplies and everything,"
Jacquemont told him. "We can lift off tonight."




III


The ship lurched slightly. In the outside screens, the lights around,
the crowd that was waving good-bye, and the floor of the crater began
receding. The sound pickups were full of cheering, and the boom of a
big gun at one of the top batteries, and the recorded and amplified
music of a band playing the traditional "Spacemen's Hymn."

"It's been a long time since I heard that played in earnest,"
Jacquemont said. "Well, we're off to see the Wizard."

The lights dwindled and merged into a tiny circle in the darkness of
the crater. The music died away; the cannon shots became a faint
throbbing. Finally, there was silence, and only the stars above and
the dark land and the starlit sea below. After a long while a sunset
glow, six hours past on Barathrum, appeared in the west, behind the
now appreciable curvature of the planet.

"Stand by for shift to vertical," Captain Nichols called, his voice
echoing from PA-outlets through the ship.

"Ready for shift, Captain Nichols," Jacquemont reported from the
duplicate-control panel.

Conn went to the after bulkhead, leaning his back against it. "Ready
here, Captain," he said.

Other voices took it up. Lights winked on the control panels.

"Shifting over," Nichols said. "Your ship now, Captain Jacquemont."

"Thank you, Mr. Nichols."

The deck began to tilt, and then he was lying on his back, his feet
against the side of the control room, which had altered its shape and
dimensions. There was a jar as the drive went on in line with the new
direction of the lift and the ship began accelerating. He got to his
feet, and he and Charley Gatworth went to the astrogational computer
and began checking the data and setting the course for the point in
space at which Koshchei would be in a hundred and sixty hours.

"Course set, Captain," he reported to Jacquemont, after a while.

A couple of lights winked on the control panel. There was nothing more
to do but watch Poictesme dwindle behind, and listen to the newscasts,
and take turns talking to friends on the planet.

They approached the halfway point; the acceleration rate decreased,
and the gravity indicator dropped, little by little. Everybody was
enjoying the new sense of lightness, romping and skylarking like newly
landed tourists on Luna. It was fun, as long as they landed on their
feet at each jump, and the food and liquids stayed on plates and in
glasses and cups. Yves Jacquemont began posting signs in conspicuous
places:

WEIGHT IS WHAT YOU LIFT, MASS IS WHAT HURTS
WHEN IT HITS YOU.
WEIGHT DEPENDS ON GRAVITY; MASS IS ALWAYS CONSTANT.

His father came on-screen from his office in Storisende. By then,
there was a 30-second time lag in communication between the ship and
Poictesme.

"My private detectives found out about the _Andromeda_," he said.
"She's going to Panurge, in the Gamma System. They have a couple of
computermen with them, one they hired from the Stock Exchange, and one
they practically shanghaied away from the Government. And some of the
people who chartered the ship are members of a family that were
interested in a positronic-equipment plant on Panurge at the time of
the War."

"That's all right, then; we don't need to worry about that any more.
They're just hunting for Merlin."

Some of his companions were looking at him curiously. A little later,
Piet Ludvyckson, the electromagnetics engineer, said: "I thought you
were looking for Merlin, Conn."

"Not on Koschchei. We're looking for something to build a hypership
out of. If I had Merlin in my hip pocket right now, I'd trade it for
one good ship like the _City of Asgard_ or the _City of Nefertiti_,
and give a keg of brandy and a box of cigars to boot. If we had a ship
of our own, we'd be selling lots of both, and not for Storisende
Spaceport prices, either."

"But don't you think Merlin's important?" Charley Gatworth, who had
overheard him, asked.

"Sure. If we find Merlin, we can run it for President. It would make a
better one than Jake Vyckhoven."

He let it go at that. Plenty of opportunities later to expand the
theme.

The gravitation gauge dropped to zero. Now they were in free fall, and
it lasted twice as long as Yves Jacquemont had predicted. There were a
few misadventures, none serious and most of them comic--For example,
when Jerry Rivas opened a bottle of beer, everybody was chasing the
amber globules and catching them in cups, and those who were splashed
were glad it hadn't been hot coffee.

They made their second, 180-degree turnover while weightless. Then
they began decelerating and approached Koshchei stern-on, and the
gravity gauge began climbing slowly up again, and things began
staying put, and they were walking instead of floating. Koshchei grew
larger and larger ahead; the polar icecaps, and the faint dappling of
clouds, and the dark wiggling lines on the otherwise uniform red-brown
surface which were mountain ranges became visible. Finally they began
to see, first with the telescopic screens and then without
magnification, the little dots and specks that were cities and
industrial centers.

Then they were in atmosphere, and Jacquemont made the final shift, to
horizontal position, and turned the ship over to Nichols.

For a moment, the scout-boat tumbled away from the ship and Conn was
back in free fall. Then he got on the lift-and-drive and steadied it,
and pressed the trigger button, firing a green smoke bomb. Beside him,
Yves Jacquemont put on the radio and the screen pickups. He could see
the ship circling far above, and the manipulator-boat, with its
claw-arms and grapples, breaking away from it. Then he looked down on
the endless desert of iron oxide that stretched in all directions to
the horizon, until he saw a spot, optically the size of a
five-centisol piece, that was the shipbuilding city of Port Carpenter.
He turned the boat toward it, firing four more green smokes at
three-second intervals. The manipulator-boat started to follow, and
the _Harriet Barne_, now a distant speck in the sky, began coming
closer.

Below, as he cut speed and altitude, he could see the pock-marks of
open-pit mines and the glint of sunlight on bright metal and
armor-glass roofs, the blunt conical stacks of nuclear furnaces and
the twisted slag-flows, like the ancient lava-flows of Barathrum. And,
he reflected, he was an influential non-office-holding stockholder in
every bit of it, as soon as they could screen Storisende and get
claims filed.

A high tower rose out of the middle of Port Carpenter, with a
glass-domed mushroom top. That would be the telecast station; the
administrative buildings were directly below it and around its base.
He came in slowly over the city, above a spaceport with its empty
landing pits in a double circle around a traffic-control building,
and airship docks and warehouses beyond. More steel mills. Factories,
either hemispherical domes or long buildings with rounded tops.
Ship-construction yards and docks; for the most part, these were
empty, but on some of them the landing-stands of spaceships, like
eight-and ten-legged spiders, waiting for forty years for hulls to be
built on them. A few spherical skeletons of ships, a few with some of
the outer skin on. It wasn't until he was passing close to them that
he realized how huge they were. And stacks of material--sheet steel,
deckplate, girders--and contragravity lifters and construction
machines, all left on jobs that were never finished, the bright
rustless metal dulled by forty years of rain and windblown red dust.
They must have been working here to the very last, and then, when the
evacuation elsewhere was completed, they had dropped whatever they
were doing, piled into such ships as were completed, and lifted away.

The mushroom-topped tower rose from the middle of a circular building
piled level on level, almost half a mile across. He circled over it,
saw an airship dock, and called the _Harriet Barne_ while Jacquemont
talked to Jerry Rivas, piloting the manipulator-boat. Rivas came in
and joined them in the air; they hovered over the dock and helped the
ship down when she came in, nudging her into place.

By the time Conn and Jacquemont and Rivas and Anse Dawes and Roddell
and Youtsko and Karanja were out on the dock in oxygen helmets, the
ship's airlock was opening and Nichols and Vibart and the others were
coming out, towing a couple of small lifters loaded with equipment.

The airlocked door into the building, at the end of the dock, was
closed; when somebody pulled the handle, it refused to open. That
meant it was powered from the central power plant, wherever that was.
There was a plug socket beside it, with the required voltage marked
over it. They used an extension line from a power unit on one of the
lifters to get it open, and did the same with the inner door; when it
was open, they passed into a dim room that stretched away ahead of
them and on either side.

It looked like a freight-shipping room; there were a few piles of
boxes and cases here and there, and a litter of packing material
everywhere. A long counter-desk, and a bank of robo-clerks behind it.
According to the air-analyzer, the oxygen content inside was safely
high. They all pulled off their fishbowl helmets and slung them.

"Well, we can bunk inside here tonight," somebody said. "It won't be
so crowded here."

"We'll bunk here after we find the power plant and get the ventilator
fans going," Jacquemont said.

Anse Dawes held up the cigarette he had lighted; that was all the
air-analyzer he needed.

"That looks like enough oxygen," he said.

"Yes, it makes its own ventilation; convection," Jacquemont said. "But
you go to sleep in here, and you'll smother in a big puddle of your
own exhaled CO_2. Just watch what the smoke from that cigarette's
doing."

The smoke was hanging motionless a few inches from the hot ash on the
end of the cigarette.

"We'll have to find the power plant, then," Matsui, the power-engineer
said. "Down at the bottom and in the middle, I suppose, and anybody's
guess how deep this place goes."

"We'll find plans of the building," Jerry Rivas said. "Any big dig
I've ever been on, you could always find plans. The troubleshooters
always had them; security officer, and maintenance engineer."

There were inside-use vehicles in the big room; they loaded what they
had with them onto a couple of freight-skids and piled on, starting
down a passage toward the center of the building. The passageways were
well marked with direction-signs, and they found the administrative
area at the top and center, around the base of the telecast-tower. The
security offices, from which police, military guard, fire protection
and other emergency services were handled, had a fine set of plans and
maps, not only for the building itself but for everything else in Port
Carpenter. The power plant, as Matsui had surmised, was at the very
bottom, directly below.

The only trouble, after they found it, was that it was completely
dead. The reactors wouldn't react, the converters wouldn't convert,
and no matter how many switches they shoved in, there was no power
output. The inside telemetered equipment, of course, was self-powered.
Some of them were dead, too, but from those which still worked
Mohammed Matsui got a uniformly disheartening story.

"You know what happened?" he said. "When this gang bugged out, back in
854, they left the power on. Now the conversion mass is all gone, and
the plutonium's all spent. We'll have to find more plutonium, and tear
this whole thing down and refuel it, and repack the mass-conversion
chambers--provided nothing's eaten holes in itself after the mass
inside was all converted."

"How long will it take?" Conn asked.

"If we can find plutonium, and if we can find robots to do the work
inside, and if there's been no structural damage, and if we keep at
it--a couple of days."

"All right; let's get at it. I don't know where we'll find shipyards
like these anywhere else, and if we do, things'll probably be as bad
there. We came here to fix things up and start them, didn't we?"




XIV


It didn't take as long as Mohammed Matsui expected. They found the
fissionables magazine, and in it plenty of plutonium, each
subcritical slug in a five-hundred-pound collapsium canister. There
were repair-robots, and they only had to replace the cartridges in the
power units of three of them. They sent them inside the
collapsium-shielded death-to-people area--transmitter robots, to relay
what the others picked up through receptors wire-connected with the
outside; foremen-robots, globes a yard in diameter covered with horns
and spikes like old-fashioned ocean-navy mines; worker-robots, in a
variety of shapes, but mostly looking like many-clawed crabs.

Neither the converter nor the reactor had sustained any damage while
the fissionables were burning out. So the robots began tearing out
reactor-elements, and removing plutonium slugs no longer capable of
sustaining chain reaction but still dangerously radioactive. Nuclear
reactors had become simpler and easier to service since the First Day
of the Year Zero, when Enrico Fermi put the first one into operation,
but the principles remained the same. Work was less back-breaking and
muscle-straining, but it called for intense concentration on screens
and meters and buttons that was no less exhausting.

The air around them began to grow foul. Finally, the air-analyzer
squawked and flashed red lights to signal that the oxygen had dropped
below the safety margin. They had no mobile fan equipment, or time to
hunt any; they put on their fishbowl helmets and went back to work.
After twelve hours, with a few short breaks, they had the reactors
going. Jerry Rivas and a couple of others took a heavy-duty lifter and
went looking for conversion mass; they brought back a couple of tons
of scrap-iron and fed it to the converters. A few seconds after it was
in, the pilot lights began coming on all over the panels. They took
two more hours to get the oxygen-separator and the ventilator fans
going, and for good measure they started the water pumps and the
heating system. Then they all went outside to the ship to sleep. The
sun was just coming up.

It was sunset when they rose and returned to the building. The
airlocks opened at a touch on the operating handles. Inside, the air
was fresh and sweet, the temperature was a pleasantly uniform 75
degrees Fahrenheit, the fans were humming softly, and there was
running hot and cold water everywhere.

Jerry Rivas, Anse Dawes, and the three tramp freighter fo'c'sle hands
took lifters and equipment and went off foraging. The rest of them
went to the communications center to get the telecast station, the
radio beacon, and the inside-screen system into operation. There were
a good many things that had to be turned on manually, and more things
that had been left on, forty years ago, and now had to be repowered or
replaced. They worked at it most of the night; before morning, almost
everything was working, and they were sending a signal across
twenty-eight million miles to Storisende, on Poictesme.

It was late evening, Storisende time, but Rodney Maxwell, who must
have been camping beside his own screen, came on at once, which is to
say five and a half minutes later.

"Well, I see you got in somewhere. Where are you, and how is
everything?"

Then he picked up a cigar out of an ashtray in front of him and lit
it, waiting.

"Port Carpenter; we're in the main administration building," Conn told
him. He talked for a while about what they had found and done since
their arrival. "Have you an extra viewscreen, fitted for recording?"
he asked.

Five and a half minutes later, his father nodded. "Yes, right here."
He leaned forward and away from the communication screen in front of
him. "I have it on." He gave the wave-length combination. "Ready to
receive."

"This is about all we have, now. Views we took coming in, from the
ship and a scout-boat." He started transmitting them. "We haven't sent
in any claims yet. I wasn't sure whether I should make them for
Alpha-Interplanetary, or Litchfield Exploration & Salvage."

"Don't bother sending in anything to the Claims Office," his father
said. "Send anything you want to claim in here to me, and I'll have
Sterber, Flynn & Chen-Wong file them. They'll be made for a new
company we're organizing."

"What? Another one?"

His father nodded, grinning. "Koshchei Exploitation & Development;
we've made application already. We can't claim exclusive rights to the
whole planet, like the old interstellar exploration companies did
before the War, but since you're the only people on the planet, we can
come pretty close to it by detail." He was looking to one side, at the
other screen. "Great Ghu, Conn! This place of yours all together
beats everything I ever dug, Force Command and Barathrum Spaceport
included. How big would you say it is? More than ten miles in radius?"

"About five or six. Ten or twelve miles across."

"That's all right, then. We'll just claim the building you're in, now,
and the usual ten-mile radius, the same as at Force Command. We'll
claim the place as soon as the company's chartered; in the meantime,
send in everything else you can get views of."

They set up a regular radio-and-screen watch after that. Charley
Gatworth and Piet Ludvyckson, both of whom were studying astrogation
in hopes of qualifying as space officers after they had a real
spaceship, elected themselves to that duty; it gave them plenty of
time for study. Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes, with whomever they could
find to help them, were making a systematic search. They looked first
of all for foodstuffs, and found enough in the storerooms of three
restaurants on the executive level to feed their own party in gourmet
style for a year, and enough in the main storerooms to provision an
army. They even found refrigerators and freeze-bins full of meat and
vegetables fresh after forty years. That surprised everybody, for the
power units had gone dead long ago. Then it was noticed that they were
covered with collapsium. Anything that would stop cosmic rays was a
hundred percent efficient as a heat insulator.

Coming in, the first day, Conn had seen an almost completed hypership
bulking above the domes and roofs of Port Carpenter in the distance.
He saw it again on screen from a pickup atop the central tower. As
soon as the party was comfortably settled in the executive apartments
on the upper levels, he and Yves Jacquemont and Mack Vibart and Schalk
Retief, the construction engineer, found an aircar in one of the
hangars and went to have a closer look at her.

She had all her collapsium on, except for a hundred-foot circle at the
top and a number of rectangular openings around the sides. Yves
Jacquemont said that would be where the airlocks would go.

"They always put them on last. But don't be surprised at anything you
find or don't find inside. As soon as the skeleton's up they put the
armor on, and then build the rest of the ship out from the middle. It
might be slower getting material in through the airlock openings, but
it holds things together while they're working."

They put on the car's lights, lifted to the top, and let down through
the upper opening. It was like entering a huge globular spider's web,
globe within globe of interlaced girders and struts and braces,
extending from the center to the outer shell. Even the spider was
home--a three-hundred-foot ball of collapsium, looking tiny at the
very middle.

"Why, this isn't a ship!" Vibart cried in disgust. "This is just the
outside of a ship. They haven't done a thing inside."

"Oh, yes, they have," Jacquemont contradicted, aiming a spotlight
toward the shimmering ball in the middle. "They have all the engines
in--Abbott lift-and-drive, Dillingham hyperdrives, pseudograv, power
reactors, converters, everything. They wouldn't have put on the
shielding if they hadn't. They did that as soon as they had the
outside armor on."

"Wonder why they didn't finish her, if they got that far," Retief
said.

"They didn't need her. They'd had it; they wanted to go home."

"Well, we're not going to finish her, not with any fifteen men,"
Retief said. "One man has only two hands, two feet and one brain; he
can only handle so much robo-equipment at a time."

"I never expected we'd build a ship ourselves," Conn said. "We came to
look the place over and get a few claims staked. When we've done that,
we'll go back and get a real gang together."

"I don't know where you'll find them," Jacquemont commented. "We'll
need a couple of hundred, and they ought all to be graduate engineers.
We can't do this job with farm-tramps."

"You made some good shipyard men out of farm-tramps on Barathrum."

"And what'll you do for supervisors?"

"You're one. General superintendent. Mack, you and Schalk are a couple
of others. You just keep a day ahead of your men in learning the job,
you'll do all right."

Vibart turned to Jacquemont. "You know, Yves, he'll do it," he said.
"He doesn't know how impossible this is, and when we try to tell him,
he won't believe us. You can't stop a guy like that. All right, Conn;
deal me in."

"I won't let anybody be any crazier than I am," Jacquemont declared,
and then looked around the vastness of the empty ship with its
lacework of steel. "All you need is about ten million square feet of
decks and bulkheads, an air-and-water system, hydroponic tanks and
carniculture vats, astrogation and robo-pilot equipment, about which I
know very little, a hyperspace pilot system, about which I know
nothing at all.... Conn, why don't you just build a new Merlin? It
would be simpler."

"I don't want a new Merlin. I'm not even interested in the original
Merlin. This is what I want, right here."

He told his father, by screen, about the ship. "I believe we can
finish her, but not with the gang that's here. We'll need a couple of
hundred men. Now, with the supplies we've found, we can stay here
indefinitely. Should we do more exploring and claim some more of these
places, or should we come home right away and start recruiting, and
then come back with a large party, start work on the ship, and explore
and make further claims as we have time?" he asked.

"Better come back as soon as possible. Just explore Port Carpenter,
find out what's going to be needed to finish the ship and what
facilities you have to produce it, and get things cleaned up a little
so that you can start work as soon as you have people to do it. I'm
organizing another company--don't laugh, now; I've only started
promotioneering--which I think we will call Trisystem & Interstellar
Spacelines. Get me all the views you can of the ship herself and of
the steel mills and that sort of thing that will produce material for
finishing her; I want to use them in promotion. By the way, has she a
name?"

"Only a shipyard construction number."

"Then suppose you call her _Ouroboros_, after Genji Gartner's old
ship, the one that discovered the Trisystem."

"_Ouroboros II_; that's fine. Will do."

"Good. I'll have Sterber, Flynn & Chen-Wong make application for a
charter right away. We'll have to make Alpha-Interplanetary one of the
stockholding companies, and also Koschchei Exploitation & Development,
and, of course, Litchfield Exploration & Salvage...."

It was a pity there really wasn't a Merlin. If this kept on nothing
else would be able to figure out who owned how much stock in what.

They found the on-the-job engineering office for the ship in a small
dome half a mile from the construction dock. Yves Jacquemont and Mack
Vibart and Schalk Retief moved in and buried themselves to the ears in
specifications and blueprints. The others formed into parties of three
or four, and began looking about production facilities for material.
There was a steel mill a mile from the construction site; it was
almost fully robotic. Iron ore went in at one end, and finished sheet
steel and girders and deck plates came out at the other, and a dozen
men could handle the whole thing. There was a collapsium plant; there
were machine-shops and forging-shops. Every time they finished
inspecting one, Yves Jacquemont would have a list of half a dozen more
plants that he wanted found and examined yesterday morning at the
latest.

Some of them were in a frightful mess; work had been suspended and
everybody had gone away leaving everything as it was. Some were in
perfect order, ready to go into operation again as soon as power was
put on. It had depended, apparently, upon the personal character of
whoever had been in charge in the end. The nuclear-electric power unit
plant was in the latter class. The man in charge of it evidently
hadn't believed in leaving messes behind, even if he didn't expect to
come back.

It was built in the shape of a T. One side of the cross-stroke
contained the cartridge-case plant, where presses formed sheet-steel
cylinders, some as small as a round of pistol ammunition and some the
size of ten-gallon kegs. They moved toward the center on a production
line, finally reaching a matter-collapser where they were plated with
collapsium. From the other side, radioactive isotopes, mostly
reactor-waste, came in through evacuated and collapsium-shielded
chambers, were sorted, and finally, where the cross-arm of the T
joined the downstroke, packed in the collapsium cases. The production
line continued at right angles down the long building in which the
apparatus which converted nuclear energy to electric current was
assembled and packed; at the end, the finished power cartridges came
off, big ones for heavy machines and tiny ones for things like hand
tools and pocket lighters and razors. There were stacks of them, in
all sizes, loaded on skids and ready to move out. Except for the
minute and unavoidable leakage of current, they were as good as the
day they were assembled, and would be for another century.

Like almost everything else, the power-cartridge plant was airtight
and had its own oxygen-generator. The air-analyzer reported the oxygen
insufficient to support life. That was understandable; there were a
lot of furnaces which had evidently been hot when the power was cut
off; they had burned up the oxygen before cooling. They put on their
oxygen equipment when they got out of the car.

"I'll go back and have a look at the power plant," Matsui said. "If
it's like the rest of this place, it'll be ready to go as soon as the
reactors are started. I wish everybody here had left things like
this."

"Well, we'll have to check everything to make sure nothing was left on
when the main power was cut," Conn said. "Don't do anything back there
till we give you the go-ahead."

Matsui nodded and set off on foot along the broad aisle in the middle.
Conn looked around in the dim light that filtered through the dusty
glass overhead. On either side of the central aisle were two
production lines; between each pair, at intervals, stood massive
machines which evidently fabricated parts for the power cartridges.
Over them, and over the machines directly involved in production,
were receptor aerials, all oriented toward a stubby tower, twenty
feet thick and fifty in height, topped by a hemispherical dome.

"That'll be the control tower for all the machinery in here," he
decided. "Anse, suppose you and I go take a look at it."

"We'll take a look at the machines," Rivas said. "Clyde, you and I can
work back on the right and then come down on the other side. You know
anything about this stuff?"

"Me? Nifflheim, no," Nichols said. "I know a robo-control when I see
one, and I know whether it's set to receive or not."

There was a self-powered lift inside the control tower. Conn and Anse
rode it to the top and got out, Anse snapping on his flashlight. It
was dark in the dome at the top; instead of windows there were
viewscreens all around it. Five men had worked here; at least, there
were four chairs at four intricate control panels, one for each of the
four production lines, and a fifth chair in front of a number of
communication screens. There was a heavy-duty power unit, turned off.
Conn threw the switch. Lights came on inside, and the outside
viewscreens lit.

They were examining the control-panels when Conn's belt radio buzzed.
He plugged it in on his helmet. It was Mohammed Matsui.

"There's one big power plant back here," the engineer said. "Right in
the middle. It only powers what's in front of it. There must be
another one in either wing, for the isotope plant and the
cartridge-case plant. I'll go look at them. But the power's been cut
off from the machines in the main building. There's four big switches,
one for each production line--"

He was interrupted by a shout, almost a shriek, from somewhere. It
sounded like Jerry Rivas. A moment later, Rivas was clamoring:

"Conn! What did you turn on? Turn it off, right away!"

Anse jumped to the switch, pulling it with one hand and getting on his
flashlight with the other. The lights went out and the screens went
dark.

"It's off."

"The dickens it is!" Rivas disputed. "There are a couple of big
supervisor-robots circling around, and a flock of workers...."

At the same time, Clyde Nichols began cursing. Or maybe he was
praying; it was hard to be certain.

"But we pulled the switch. It was only the lights and viewscreens in
here, anyhow."

"It didn't do any good. Pull another one."

Matsui, back at the power plant, was wanting to know what was wrong.
Captain Nichols stopped cursing--or praying?--and said, "Mutiny,
that's what! The robots have turned on us!"

He knew what had happened, or was almost sure he did. A radio impulse
had gone out, somehow, from the control tower. Something they hadn't
checked, that had been left on. There was just enough current-leakage
from the units in the robots to keep the receptors active for forty
years. The supervisor-robots had gone active, and they had activated
the rest. Once on, cutting the current from the control tower wouldn't
turn them off again.

"Put the switch in again, Anse; the damage is done and you won't make
it any worse."

When the screens came on, he looked around from one to another. The
two supervisors, big ovoid things like the small round ones they had
used in repairing the power reactors the first day, were circling
aimlessly near the roof, one clockwise and the other counterclockwise,
dodging obstructions and getting politely out of each other's way. At
lower altitude, a dozen assorted worker-robots were moving about, and
more were emerging from cells at the end of the building. Sweepers,
with rotary brooms and rakes, crablike all-purpose handling robots, a
couple of vacuum-cleaning robots, each with a flexible funnel-tipped
proboscis and a bulging dust-sack. One tiling, a sort of special job
designed to get into otherwise inaccessible places, had a twenty-foot,
many-jointed, claw-tipped arm in front. It passed by and slightly over
the tower, saw Clyde Nichols, and swooped toward him. With a howl,
Nichols dived under one of the large machines between two production
lines. A pistol went off a couple of times. That would be Jerry Rivas.
Nobody else bothered with a gun on Koshchei, but he carried one as
some people carry umbrellas, whether he expected to need it or not and
because he would feel lost without it.

That he took in at one glance. Then he was looking at the control
panels. The switches and buttons were all marked for machine-control
in different steps of power-unit production. That was all for the big
stuff, powered centrally. There weren't any controls for lifters or
conveyers or other mobile equipment. Evidently they were handled out
in the shop, from mobile control-vehicles. He did find, on the
communication-screen panel, a lot of things that had been left on. He
snapped them off, one after another, snapping them on when a screen
went dark. There were fifteen or twenty robots, some rather large, in
the air or moving on the floor by now.

"We can't do anything here," he told Anse. "These are the
shop-cleaning robots. They were the last things used here when the
place closed down, and the two supervisors were probably controlled
from a vehicle, and it's anybody's guess where that is now. When you
threw that switch, it sent out an impulse that activated them. They're
running their instruction-tapes, and putting the others through all
their tricks."

Three more shots went off. Jerry Rivas was shouting: "Hey, whattaya
know! I killed one of the buggers!"

There were any number of ways in which a work-robot could be shot out
of commission with a pistol. All of them would be by the purest of
pure luck. The next time we go into a place like this, Conn thought,
we take a couple of bazookas along.

"Turn everything off and let's go. See what we can do outside."

Anse put on his flashlight and pulled the switch. They got into the
lift and rode down, going outside. As soon as they emerged, they saw a
rectangular object fifteen feet long settle over their aircar, let
down half a dozen clawed arms, and pick it up, flying away with it. It
had taped instructions to remove anything that didn't belong in the
aisleway; it probably asked the supervisor about the aircar, and the
supervisor didn't return an inhibitory signal, so it went ahead. Conn
and Anse both shouted at it, knowing perfectly well that shouting was
futile. Then they were running for their lives with one of the
crablike all-purpose jobs after them. They dived under the slightly
raised bed of a long belt-conveyer and crawled. Jerry Rivas fired
another shot, somewhere.

The robots themselves were having troubles. They had done all the work
they were supposed to do; now the supervisors were insisting that they
do it over again. Uncomplainingly, they swept and raked and
vacuum-cleaned where they had vacuum-cleaned and raked and swept forty
years ago. The scrap-pickers, having picked all the scrap, were going
over the same places and finding nothing, and then getting deflected
and gathering a lot of things not definable as scrap, and then
circling around, darting away from one another in obedience to their
radar-operated evasion-systems, and trying to get to the outside scrap
pile, and finding that the doors wouldn't open because the door
openers weren't turned on, and finally dumping what they were carrying
when the supervisors gave them no instructions.

One of them seemed to have dumped something close to where Clyde
Nichols was hiding; if his language had been a little stronger, it
would have burned out Conn's radio. Their own immediate vicinity being
for the moment clear of flying robots, Conn and Anse rolled from under
the conveyer and legged it between the two production lines.
Immediately, three of the crablike all-purpose handling-robots saw
them, if that was the word for it, and came dashing for them, followed
by a thing that was mostly dump-lifter; it was banging its bin-lid up
and down angrily. About fifty yards ahead, Jerry Rivas stepped from
behind a machine and fired; one of the handling-robots flashed green
from underneath, went off contragravity, and came down with a crash.
Immediately, like wolves on a wounded companion, the other two pounced
upon it, dragging and pulling against each other. That was a hunk of
junk; their orders were to remove it.

The mobile trash-bin went zooming up to the ceiling, reversed within
twenty feet of it and came circling back to the ground, to go zooming
up again. It had gone crazy, literally. It had been getting too many
contradictory orders from its supervisor, and its circuits were
overloaded and its relays jammed. Rats in mazes and human-type people
in financial difficulties go psychotic in very much the same way.

The two surviving all-purpose robots were also headed for a padded
repair shop. They had come close enough to each other to activate
their anticollision safeties. Immediately, they flew apart. Then their
order to pick up that big piece of junk took over, and they started
forward again, to be bounced apart as soon as they were within five
feet of one another. If left alone, their power units would run down
in a year or so; until then, they would keep on trying.

Soulless intelligences, indeed! Then it occurred to him that for the
past however-long-it-had-been he hadn't heard from Mohammed Matsui. He
jiggled his radio.

"Ham, where are you? Are you still alive?"

"I'm back at the power plant," Matsui said exasperatedly. "There's a
big thing circling around here; every time I stick my head out, he
makes a dive at me. I didn't know robots would attack people."

"They don't. He just thinks you're some more trash he's been told to
gather up."

Matsui was indignant. Conn laughed.

"On the level, Ham. He has photoelectric vision, and a picture of what
that aisle is supposed to look like. When you get out in it, he knows
you don't belong there and tries to grab you."

"Hey, there's a lot of junk in here in a couple of baskets at the
converter. Say I chuck one out to him; what would he do?"

"Grab it and take it away, like he's taped to do."

"Okay; wait a minute."

They couldn't see the archway to the power plant, or even the robot
that had Matsui penned up, but after a few minutes they saw it soaring
away, clutching a big wire basket full of broken boxes and other
rubbish. It headed for the mutually repelling swarm of robots around
the door that wouldn't open for them. Conn and Anse and Jerry ran
toward the rear, joined by Clyde Nichols, who popped up from behind a
pile of spools of electric wire. They made it just before the
coffin-shaped thing that had carried off the aircar came over to
investigate.

"You want to be careful back there," Matsui told them, as they started
toward the temporary safety of the power plant. "All the
reactor-repair robots are there; don't get _them_ on the warpath
next."

Of course! There were always repair-robots at a power plant, to go
into places no human could enter and live. Behind the collapsium
shielding, they wouldn't have been activated.

"Let's have a look at them. What kind?"

"Standard reactor-servicers; the same we used at the administration
center."

Matsui opened the door, and they went into the power plant. Conn and
Matsui put on the service-power and activated the two supervisors;
they, in turn, activated their workers. It was tricky work getting
them all outside the collapsium-walled power-plant area; each worker
had to be passed through by the supervisor inside, under Matsui's
control. Because of the close quarters at which they worked inside the
reactor and the converter, they weren't fitted with anticollision
repulsors, and, working under close human supervision, they all had
audiovisual pickups. It took some time to get adequate screens set up
outside the collapsium.

Finally, they were ready. Their two supervisors went up to the
ceiling, one controlled by Conn and the other by Matsui. The larger,
egg-shaped shop-labor supervisors were still moving in irregular
orbits; those of the workers still able to receive commands were
trying to obey them, and the rest were jammed in a swarm at the other
end.

First one, and then the other of the labor-boss robots were captured.
They were by now at the end of what might, loosely, be called their
wits. They weren't used to operating without orders, and had been
sending out commands largely at random. Now they came to a stop, and
then began moving in tight, guided circles; one by one, the worker
robots still able to heed them were brought to ground and turned off.
That left the swarm at the door. The worker-robots under direct
control of the power-plant supervisors went after them, grappling them
and hauling them down to where Anse and Jerry Rivas and Captain
Nichols could turn them off manually.

The aircar was a hopeless wreck, but its radio was still functioning.
Conn called Charley Gatworth, who called a gang under Gomez, working
not far away; they came with another car.

It took all the next day for a gang of six of them to get the place
straightened up. Neither Conn nor Gomez, who was a roboticist himself,
would trust any of the workers or the two supervisors; their
experiences out of control had rendered them unreliable. They took out
their power units and left them to be torn down and repaired later.
Other robots were brought in to replace them. When they were through,
the power-unit cartridge plant was ready for operation.

Jerry Rivas wanted to start production immediately.

"We'll have to go back to Poictesme pretty soon," he said. "We don't
want to go back empty. Well, I know that no matter what we dug up, and
what we could sell or couldn't sell, there's always a market for
power-unit cartridges. Electric-light units, household-appliance
units, aircar and airboat units, any size at all. We run that plant at
full capacity for a few days and we can load the _Harriett Barne_
full, and I'll bet the whole cargo will be sold in a week after we get
in."




XV


The _Harriet Barne_ settled comfortably at the dock, the
bunting-swathed tugs lifting away from her. They had the outside sound
pickups turned as low as possible, and still the noise was deafening.
The spaceport was jammed, people on the ground and contragravity
vehicles swarming above, with police cars vainly trying to keep them
in order. All the bands in Storisende seemed to have been combined;
they were blaring the "Planetary Hymn";

_Genji Gartner's body lies a-moldering in the tomb,
But his soul goes marching on!_

When they opened the airlock, there was a hastily improvised
ceremonial barge, actually a farm-scow completely draped in red and
white, the Planetary colors. They all stopped, briefly, as they came
out, to enjoy the novelty of outdoor air which could actually be
breathed. Conn saw his father in the scow, and beside him Sylvie
Jacquemont, trying, almost successfully, to keep from jumping up and
down in excitement. Morgan Gatworth to meet his son, and Lester Dawes
to meet his. Kurt Fawzi, Dolf Kellton, Colonel Zareff, Tom Brangwyn.
He didn't see his mother, or his sister. Flora he had hardly counted
on, but he was disappointed that his mother wasn't there to meet him.

Sylvie was embracing her father as he shook hands with his; then she
threw her arms around his neck.

"Oh, Conn, I'm so happy! I was watching everything I could on-screen,
everything you saw, and all the places you were, and everything you
were doing...."

The scow--pardon, ceremonial barge--gave a slight lurch, throwing
them together. Over her shoulder, he saw his father and Yves
Jacquemont exchanging grins. Then they had to break it up while he
shook hands with Fawzi and Judge Ledue and the others, and by the time
that was over, the barge was letting down in front of the stand at the
end of the dock, and the band was still deafening Heaven with "Genji
Gartner's Body," and they all started up the stairs to be greeted by
Planetary President Vyckhoven; he looked like an elderly bear who has
been too well fed for too long in a zoo. And by Minister-General
Murchison, who represented the Terran Federation on Poictesme. He was
thin and balding, and he looked as though he had just mistaken the
vinegar cruet for the wine decanter. Genji Gartner's soul stopped
marching on, but the speeches started, and that was worse. And after
the speeches, there was the parade, everybody riding in
transparent-bodied aircars, and the _Lester Dawes_ and the two ships
of the new Planetary Air Navy and a swarm of gunboats in column five
hundred feet above, all firing salutes.

In spite of what wasn't, but might just as well have been, a concerted
conspiracy to keep them apart, he managed to get a few words privately
with Sylvie.

"My mother; she didn't get here. Is anything wrong?"

"Is anything anything else? I've been in the middle of it ever since
you went away. Your mother's still moaning about all these companies
your father's promoting--he never used to do anything like that, and
it's all too big, and it's going to end in a big smash. And then she
gets onto Merlin. You know, she won't say Merlin, she always calls it,
'that thing.'"

"I've noticed that."

"Then she begins talking about all the horrible things that'll happen
when it's found, and that sets Flora off. Flora says Merlin's a big
fake, and you and your father are using it to rob thousands of widows
and orphans of their life savings, and that sets your mother off
again. Self-sustaining cyclic reaction, like the Bethe solar-phoenix.
And every time I try to pour a little oil on the troubled waters, I
find I've gotten it on the fire instead. And then, Flora had this
fight with Wade Lucas, and of course, she blames you for that."

"Good heavens, why?"

"Well, she couldn't blame it on herself, could she? Oh, you mean why
the fight? Lucas is in business with your father now, and she can't
convince him that you and your father are a pair of quadruple-dyed
villains, I suppose. Anyhow, the engagement is _phttt_! Conn, is my
father going back to Koshchei?"

"As soon as we can round up some people to help us on the ship."

"Then I'm going along. I've had it, Conn. I'm a combat-fatigue case."

"But, Sylvie; that isn't any place for a girl."

"Oh, poo! This is Sylvie. We're old war buddies. We soldiered together
on Barathrum; remember?"

"Well, you'd be the only girl, and...."

"That's what you think. If you expect to get any kind of a gang
together, at least a third of them will be girls. A lot of technicians
are girls, and when work gets slack, they're always the first ones to
get shoved out of jobs. I'll bet there are a thousand girl technicians
out of work here--any line of work you want to name. I know what I'll
do; I'll make a telecast appearance. I still have some news value,
from the Barathrum business. Want to bet that I won't be the working
girl's Joan of Arc by this time next week?"

That cheered him. A girl can punch any kind of a button a man can, and
a lot of them knew what buttons to punch, and why. Say she could find
fifty girls....

He had a slightly better chance to talk to his father before the
banquet at the Executive Palace that evening. They shared the same
suite at the Ritz-Gartner, and even welcoming committees seldom chase
their victims from bedroom to bath.

"Yes, I know all about it," Rodney Maxwell said bitterly. "I was home,
a couple of weeks ago. Flora simply will not speak to me, and your
mother begged me, in tears, to quit everything we're doing here. I
tried to give her some idea of what would happen if I dropped this,
even supposing I could; she wouldn't listen to me." He finished
putting the studs in his shirt. "You still think this is worth what
it's costing us?"

"You saw the views we sent back. There's work on Koshchei for a
million people, at least. Why, even these two makeshift ships they're
putting together here at Storisende are giving work, one way or
another, to almost a thousand. Think what things will be like a year
from now, if this keeps on."

Rodney Maxwell gave a wry laugh. "Didn't know I had a real Simon-pure
altruist for a son."

"Pardner, when you call me that, smile."

"I am smiling. With some slight difficulty."

He didn't think well of the banquet. Back in Litchfield, Senta would
have fired half her human help and taken a sledgehammer to her
robo-chef for a meal like that. Even his father's camp cook would have
been ashamed of it. And there were more speeches.

President Vyckhoven managed to get hold of him and Yves Jacquemont
afterward, and steered them into his private study.

"Have you any real reason for thinking that Merlin might be on
Koshchei?" the Planetary President asked.

"Great Ghu, no! We weren't looking for Merlin, Mr. President. We were
looking for a hypership. We have one, too. Calling her _Ouroboros II_.
Twenty-five-hundred-footer. We expect to have her to space in a few
months. I surely don't need to tell you what that will do toward
restoring planetary prosperity."

"No, of course not; a hypership of our own. But...." He looked from
one to the other of them. "But I understood.... That is, Mr. Kurt
Fawzi was saying...."

"Mr. Fawzi is looking for Merlin here on Poictesme. If anybody finds
it, that's where it'll be found. I'm interested in getting business
started again. If Merlin is found, it would help, of course." He
shrugged.

"Don't look at me," Jacquemont said. "Mr. Maxwell--both of them,
father and son--want some spaceships. They hired me to help build
them. That's all I have in it." Then he relit the cigar the President
had given him and leaned back in his chair, staring at the stuffed
alcesoid head with the seven-foot hornspread above the fireplace.

Conn described the interview to his father after they were back at the
hotel.

"I hope you convinced him. You know, he's afraid of Merlin. A lot of
people have been saying that if Merlin's found, it should be used to
determine Government policy. A few extremists are beginning to say
that Merlin ought to _be_ the Government, and Jake Vyckhoven and his
cronies ought to be dumped. Into the handiest mass-energy converter,
preferably. You know, if anybody found Merlin and started it auditing
the Planetary Treasury, Jake Vyckhoven'd be the one who'd be wanting a
hypership."

Tom Brangwyn ran him down the next morning in the dining room.

"Conn, I wish you'd come along with me," he said. "Some of us are up
in Kurt's suite; we'd all like to talk to you."

Somehow, he was acting as though he were making an arrest. That might
have been nothing but professional habit. Conn went up to Fawzi's
suite, and found Fawzi and Judge Ledue and Dolf Kellton and close to a
dozen others there.

"I'm glad you could come, Conn," the Judge greeted him. Now that the
defendant had arrived, the trial could begin. "I wish your father
could have gotten here. I asked him to come, but he had a prior
engagement. A meeting with some of the financial people here, about
some company he's interested in."

"That's right; Trisystem & Interstellar Spacelines."

"Interstellar!" Kurt Fawzi almost howled. "Great Ghu! Now it isn't
enough to go out to Koshchei; he wants to go clear out of the
Trisystem. That's what we wanted to talk about; all this nonsense you
and your father are in. Merlin's right here on Poictesme. It's right
at Force Command, and if your father hadn't robbed us of all our best
men, like Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes, we'd have found it by now. I
don't think you and your father care a hoot if we ever find Merlin or
not!"

"Kurt, that's a dreadful thing to say," Dolf Kellton objected in a
shocked voice.

"It's a dreadful thing to have to say," Fawzi replied, "but you tell
me what Conn Maxwell or Rodney Maxwell are doing to help find it."

"Who showed you where Force Command was?" Klem Zareff asked.

Nobody could think of any good quick comeback to that.

Conn took advantage of the pause to ask, "Why do you want to find
Merlin?"

"Why do we ..." Fawzi spluttered indignantly. "If you don't know...."

"I know why I do. I want to see if you do. Do you?"

"Merlin would answer so many questions," Dolf Kellton told him gently.
"Questions I can't answer for myself."

"With Merlin, we could set up a legal code and a system of
jurisprudence that would give everybody absolute justice," Judge Ledue
said.

As if absolute justice wasn't the last thing anybody in his right
senses would want; a robot-judge would have the whole planet in jail
inside a month.

"We have a man who joined us after you went off to Koshchei, Conn,"
Franz Veltrin said. "A Mr. Carl Leibert. He's some kind of a
clergyman, from over Morven way. He says that Merlin could formulate
an entirely new religion, which would regenerate humanity."

"Well, I don't have any such lofty ideas," Fawzi said. "I just want
Merlin to show us how to get some prosperity here; bring things back
to what they were before Poictesme went broke."

"And that's what Father and I are trying to do. You're going into the
woods with a book on how to chop down a tree, and no ax." Fawzi looked
at him in surprise, started to say something, and thought better of
it. "If we want prosperity, we need tools. Our problem is loss of
markets. If we find Merlin, and tape it with everything that's
happened in the forty years since it was shut down, Merlin will tell
us where to find new markets. But the markets won't come to us. We'll
have to do our own exporting, and we'll need ships. Now, you men have
been studying about Merlin, and hunting for Merlin, all your lives. I
can't add anything to what you know, and neither can my father. You
find Merlin, and we'll have the ships ready when you do find it."

"Kurt, I think he has a point," somebody said.

"You're blasted well right he has," Klem Zareff put in. "If it wasn't
for Conn Maxwell, you know where we'd be? Back in Litchfield, sitting
around in Kurt's office, talking about how wonderful things'll be when
we find Merlin, and doing nothing to find it."

"Kurt, I believe Conn is entitled to an apology," Judge Ledue ruled.
"How close we are to finding Merlin I don't know, but it is due to him
that we have any hope of finding it at all."

"Conn, I'm sorry," Fawzi said. "I oughtn't to have said some of the
things I did. But we're all on edge; we've been having so much
trouble.... Conn, it's right there at Force Command; I know it is.
We've been all over the place. We have shafts sunk at each of the
corners; we've used scanners, and put off echo shots. Nothing. We
looked for additional passages out of the headquarters; there aren't
any. But it has to be somewhere around. It just _has_ to be!"

"Maybe if I go out to Force Command with you, I might see something
you've overlooked. And if I can't, I'll try to scrape up some stuff on
Koshchei for you. Deep-vein scanners, that sort of thing, from the
mines."

They took the _Lester Dawes_ out at a little past noon and turned
south and east. Everybody aboard was happy--except Conn Maxwell. He
was thinking of the years and years ahead of these trusting, hopeful
old men, each year the grave of another expectation. Two hundred miles
from Force Command, the _Goblin_ met them, her sides still spalled and
dented from the hits she had taken in Barathrum Spaceport. When they
came in sight of it, the mesa-top was deserted. Fawzi began wondering
where in Nifflheim all the drilling rigs, and the seismo-trucks, were.
Somebody with a pair of binoculars called attention to activity on the
side of the high butte on top of which the relay station was located.
Fawzi began swearing exasperatedly.

"Might be something Mr. Leibert thought of," Franz Veltrin suggested.

"Then why in blazes didn't he screen us about it?"

"Who is this Leibert?" Conn asked. "Somebody mentioned him this
morning, I think."

"He joined us after you left, Conn," Dolf Kellton said. "He's a
clergyman from Morven. No regular denomination; he has a sect of his
own."

"Yah, he would!" Klem Zareff rumbled. "Pious fraud!"

"He's really a good man, Conn; Klem's prejudiced. He says we ought to
use Merlin to show us the true nature of God, and how to live in
accordance with the Divine Will. He says Merlin can teach us a new
religion."

A new religion, based on Merlin; that would be good. And then the
fanatics who thought Merlin was the Devil would start a holy war to
wipe out the servants of Satan, and with all the combat equipment that
was lying around on this planet.... For the first time since this
business started, he began to feel really frightened.

An aircar came bulleting away from the butte and landed on the mesa as
the _Lester Dawes_ set down. The man who met them at the head of the
vertical shaft wore Federation fatigues--baggy trousers, ankle boots
and long smock, dyed black. He was bareheaded, and his white hair was
almost shoulder-long. He had a white beard.

"Welcome, Brothers," he greeted, a hand raised in benediction. "And
who is this with you?"

His voice was high and quavery; not a good pulpit voice, Conn thought.

Kurt Fawzi introduced Conn, and Leibert grasped his hand with a grip
that was considerably stronger than his voice.

"Bless you, young man! It is to you alone that we owe our thanks that
we are about to find the Great Computer. Every sapient being in the
Galaxy will honor your name for a thousand years."

"Well, I hadn't counted on quite that much, Mr. Leibert. If it'll only
help a few of these people to make a decent living I'll be satisfied."

Leibert shook his head sadly. "You think entirely in material terms,
young man," he reproved. "Forget these things; acquire the higher
spiritual values. The Great Computer must not be degraded to such
uses; we should let it show us how to lift ourselves to a high
spiritual plane...."

It went on like that, after they went down to Foxx Travis's--now
Fawzi's--office, where there were silver-stoppered decanters instead
of the old green-glass pitcher, and gold-plated ashtrays, and thick
carpets on the floor. The man was a lunatic; he made Fawzi's office
gang look frigidly sane. Furthermore, he was an ignoramus. He had no
idea what a computer could or couldn't do. Anybody who could build a
computer of the sort he thought Merlin was wouldn't need it, he
_would_ be God.

As he talked, Conn began to be nagged by an odd sense of recognition.
He'd seen this Carl Leibert before, somewhere, and somehow he was sure
that the long white hair and the untrimmed beard weren't part of the
picture. That puzzled him. He doubted if he'd have remembered Leibert
from six years ago, almost seven, now, though a lot of itinerant
evangelists showed up in Litchfield. That might have been it.

"I tell you, the Great Computer is there, in the heart of the butte,"
Leibert was insisting, now. "It has been revealed to me in a dream. It
is completely buried. After it was made, no human touched it. The men
who were here and used it in the War communicated with it only by
radio."

That could be so. There were fully robotic computers, intended for use
in places where no human could go and live. There was a big one on
Nifflheim, armored against the fluorine atmosphere and the
hydrofluoric-acid rains. But there was no point in that here, the
things were enormously complicated, and military engineering of any
sort emphasized simplicity--_Aaaagh!_ Was he beginning to believe this
balderdash himself?

Klem Zareff fell in with him as they were going to dinner. "Revealed
in a dream!" the old Rebel snorted. "One thing you can always get
away with lying about is what you dream."

"You think he's lying? I think he's just crazy."

"That's what he wants you to think. Look, Conn, he knows Merlin is
here; he's trying to keep us from it. That's why he shifted all that
equipment over on the butte. He's working for Sam Murchison."

"I thought your theory was that the Federation had lost Merlin."

"It was, at first. It doesn't look that way to me now. It's right here
at Force Command, somewhere. They don't want it found, and they're
going to do everything they can to stop us. I oughtn't to have left
this fellow Leibert here alone; well, I won't do that again. Get Tom
Brangwyn to help me."




XVI


The voyage back to Koshchei had been a week-long nightmare. When she
had been the pride and budget-wrecker of Transcontinent & Overseas
Airline, the _Harriet Barne_ had accommodated two hundred first-class
and five hundred lower-deck passengers, but the conversion to a
spaceship had drastically reduced her capacity. The three hundred men
and women who had been recruited for the Koshchei colony had been
crammed into her with brutal disregard for comfort, privacy or
anything else except the ability of the air-recyclers to keep them
breathing. When Captain Nichols set her down at the administration
building at Port Carpenter, a few had had to be carried off, but they
were all alive, which made the trip an unqualified success.

The dozen leaders of the expedition were congratulating themselves on
that in one of the executive offices after the first dinner at Port
Carpenter. Rodney Maxwell, in Storisende, had joined them in
screen-image; he was mostly listening, and sometimes contributing a
remark apropos of something the rest of them had said five minutes
ago.

"Our hypership," Conn was saying, "is going to have to be item
two on the agenda. The first thing we need is a ship for the
Poictesme-Koshchei run. By this time next year, we ought to have a
thousand to fifteen hundred people here at the least. We can't haul
them all on that flying sardine can."

"We'll need supplies, too. What was left here won't last forever,"
Nichols added.

"And you're going to have to run this at a profit," Luther Chen-Wong,
who had come along for first hand experience and to help with
administrative work, added. "You have a big payroll to meet, and
you'll have to keep the stockholders happy. People like Jethro
Sastraman and some of these Storisende bankers aren't going to be
satisfied with promises and long-term prospects; they'll want
dividends."

"We'll have to get claims staked on something besides Port Carpenter,
too. Those ships that are building at Storisende will be finished
before long," Jerry Rivas said. "If we don't get some more things
claimed, the first thing you know, we'll own Port Carpenter and
nothing else."

"Well, let's see what we can find in the way of a big airboat, or a
small ship," Conn said. "Jerry, you can pick a party for exploring.
Just zigzag around the planet and transmit in locations and views of
whatever you find, and we'll send it on to Storisende."

"And don't pick anybody for your exploring party that can't be spared
from anything here," Jacquemont added. "We don't want to have to chase
you halfway around the world to bring back the only specialist in
something yesterday at the latest."

"Are you going to come along, Conn?" Rivas asked.

"Oh, Lord, no! I'm going to be doing fifteen things at once here."

All the computer work. Finding materials to make astrogational
equipment and robo-pilots. Studying hyperspace theory--fortunately,
there was an excellent library here--and setting up classes, and
teaching school. And keeping in touch with his father, on Poictesme.
It was making him nervous not to know what sort of foolishness the
older and wiser heads might be getting into.

The next morning, they began organizing work-gangs and setting up
committees. Three men, two girls and about twenty robots got an
open-pit iron mine started; as soon as the steel mill was ready, ore
started coming in. Anse Dawes had a gang looking for something they
could build a 350-foot interplanetary ship out of; Jacquemont and Mack
Vibart were getting plans and specifications and making lists of
needed materials. Conn gathered a dozen men and women and started
classes in computer theory and practice; at the same time, he and
Charley Gatworth were teaching themselves and each other hyperspatial
astrogation, which was the art of tossing a ship into some
everythingless noplace outside normal space-time, and then pulling her
out again by her bootstraps at some other place in the normal
continuum, light-years away.

Roughly, it compared to shooting hummingbirds on the wing,
blindfolded, with a not particularly accurate pistol, from a
mile-a-minute merry-go-round.

That was something you could only do with a computer. A human, with a
slide rule, a pencil and pad, could figure it out, of course--if he
had fifty-odd thousand years to do it. A good computer did it in
thirty seconds. That was one difference between people and computers.
The other difference was that the desirability of making a hyperspace
jump would never occur to a computer, unless somebody pushed a button
and taped in instructions.

They found a three-hundred-foot globular skeleton, probably the
nucleus of a big hyperspace ship, and decided that was big enough for
what they wanted. The entire colony got to work on it. Photoprinted
plans and specifications poured out as Jacquemont and a couple of
draftsmen got them up. Steel came out of the steel mill at one end
while ore came in at the other. A swarm of big contragravity machines,
some robotic and some human-operated, clustered around the skeletal
hull like hornets building a nest.

Trisystem & Interstellar Spacelines was chartered; the lawyers
reported having to overcome a little more resistance than usual from
the Government about that. And the bill to nationalize Merlin, which
had died in committee, was resuscitated and was being debated hotly on
the floor of Parliament. The Administration was now supporting it.

"Are they completely crazy?" Conn wanted to know, when he heard about
that. "They pass that bill and nobody's going to look for Merlin if
they know the Government will snatch it as soon as they find it."

"That is precisely Jake Vyckhoven's idea," his father replied. "I told
you he was afraid of Merlin. He's getting more afraid of it every
day."

He had reason to. There was a growing sentiment in favor of turning
the entire Government over to the computer as soon as it was found. To
his horror, Conn heard himself named as chairman of a committee that
should be set up to operate it. The moderates, who had merely wanted
Merlin used in an advisory capacity, were dropping out; the agitation
was coming from extremists who wanted Merlin to be the whole
Government, and now the extremists were developing an extreme wing of
their own, who called themselves Cybernarchists and started wearing
colored-shirt uniforms and greeting each other with an archaic
stiff-arm salute, and the words, "Hail Merlin!"

And the followers of the gospel-shouter on the west coast were now
cropping up all over the mainland, and on the continent of Acaire to
the north, and another cult, non-religious, was convinced that Merlin
was a living machine, with conscious intelligence of its own and
awesome psi-powers, a sort of super-Golem, which, if found and
awakened, would enslave the whole Galaxy. Fortunately, these two hated
each other as venomously as both did the Cybernarchists, and spent
most of their energies attacking each other's meetings. The
news-services were beginning to publish casualty lists, some heavy
enough for outpost fighting between a couple of regular armies.

One thing, it helped the employment situation. Everybody was hiring
mercenaries.

"But what," Conn asked, "are the sane people doing?"

"You ought to know," his father told him. "I suspect that you have all
of them on Koshchei now."

The sane people, if that was what they were, were being busy. They
were putting a set of Abbott lift-and-drive engines together, and
Conn's computer class was estimating the mass of the finished ship and
the amount of energy needed to overcome gravitation and give it
constant acceleration from Koshchei to Poictesme. They were learning,
by trial and error, largely error, how to build a set of pseudograv
engines. And they were putting together a hundred and one other
things, all of which was good training for the time they'd be ready to
start work on _Ouroboros II_.

Jerry Rivas had found a contragravity craft which seemed to have been
used by some top official for business and inspection trips, had
gathered a crew of non-specialists who weren't urgently needed at Port
Carpenter, and set out to circumnavigate the planet. It worked just
the reverse of expectation. He found a big uranium mine, with an
isotope-separation plant and a battery of plutonium-breeders; that
meant that Mohammed Matsui and half a dozen other nuclear-power people
had to get into another boat and speed after him to see what he had
really found. As soon as they landed, Rivas took off again to discover
a copper mine and a complex of smelters and processing plants. That
took a few more experts, or reasonable facsimiles, away from Port
Carpenter. And then he found a whole city that manufactured nothing
but computers and robo-controls and things like that.

Conn loaded his whole computer-theory class onto a freight-scow and
took them there. By the time he landed, his father was screening him
from Storisende.

"When are you going to get the ship finished?" he was asking. "Kurt
Fawzi's pestering the daylights out of me. He wants that equipment you
promised him."

"We're working on it. What's happened, has Carl Leibert had another
revelation?"

"I don't know about that. Kurt's sure Merlin is directly under Force
Command. And speaking about Leibert, Klem Zareff's been after me about
him. You know I've contracted for the full-time and exclusive services
of this Barton-Massarra detective agency. Well, Klem wants me to put
them to work investigating Leibert."

"Yes, I know; Leibert's a Terran Federation spy. Why do you need the
full-time services of the biggest private detective agency on
Poictesme?"

"There have been some odd things happening. People have been trying to
bribe and intimidate some of my office help. I have found microphones
and screen-pickups planted around. I caught one of our clerks trying
to make copies of voice-tapes. I think it's some of these other
Merlin-chasing companies, trying to find out how close we are to it.
Klem Zareff is recruiting more guards. But how soon are you going to
get that ship built?"

"We're working on it. That's all I know, now."

He went back to work getting a classroom ready for his students. If
he'd accepted that instructorship at Montevideo, he wouldn't be a full
professor now, but none of the rest of this would be happening,
either.

That night, he had the dream about starting the big machine and not
being able to stop it again.

There was street-fighting in Storisende between the Cybernarchists and
Government troops. There was a pitched battle in the west between the
Armageddonists (Merlin-is-Satan) and the Human Supremacy League
(Merlin-is-the-Golem), with heavy losses and claims of victory on both
sides. President Vyckhoven proclaimed planet-wide martial law, and
then discovered that he had nothing to enforce it with.

Luther Chen-Wong screened him from Port Carpenter. His voice was
almost inaudibly low at first.

"Conn, I just had a call from Jerry and Clyde. I think we can knock
off work on that ship we're building now. We won't need it."

"Have they found a ship?" If they had, it would be the first one
anybody had found. "Where?"

"They haven't found _a_ ship, Conn; they've found all of them. All the
ships in the Alpha System except the _Harriet Barne_ and the two
they're building at Storisende. The place is marked on the map as
Sickle Mountain Naval Observatory. It's just a bitty little dot, but
the map was made before the evacuation started. It's where most of the
troops in the system were embarked on hyperships, I think. Wait till I
show you the views."

Conn put on another screen; the first view was from an altitude of
five miles. He didn't need Luther's voice to identify Sickle Mountain;
a long curve, with a spur at right angles to one end, the name must
have suggested itself to whoever saw it first. The observatory had
been built where the handle of the sickle joined the blade; as the
ship from which the view had been taken had approached, the details
grew plainer. At the same time, it became evident that the plain
inside the curve of the sickle was powdered with tiny sparkles, like
tinsel dust on red-brown velvet.

"Great Ghu, are those all ships?"

"That's right. Look at this one, now."

The view changed. The aircraft was down, now, below the crest of the
mountain, circling slowly above the plain. Hundreds, no, over a
thousand, of them; two- and three-and five-hundred-footers, and here
and there a thousand-footer that could have been converted into a
hypership if anybody had wanted to take the trouble. The view changed
again; this time from an aircar dropped from the ship, he supposed; it
was down almost to the tops of the ships, and he could read names and
home ports: _Pixie_, Chloris; _Helen O'Loy_, Anaitis. They were from
Jurgen. _Sky-Rover_, Port Saunders; she was from Horvendile. Ships
from Storisende, and Yellowmarsh on Janicot, and....

"Now we know where they all went."

It was logical, of course. Most of the hyperships used in the
evacuation had been built here. It had been less trouble to lead the
troops and the civilian workers from Poictesme and the other planets
onto small normal-space ships and bring them here than to take the big
ships away on short interplanetary runs to the other planets.

"Have you screened my father yet?"

"Yes. This is going to knock the bottom out of the companies that are
building those ships at Storisende, I'm afraid."

"Their tough luck."

"It could be everybody's tough luck. Both those companies have been
issuing stock, and there's been a lot of speculation in it. This
market's so inflated now that a puncture at one place might blow the
whole thing out."

He knew that. He shrugged. "Father will have to think of something.
Tell him I'll screen him from Sickle Mountain."

Then he went back to his classroom.

"All right, class dismissed," he said. "You have twenty minutes to get
your bags packed. We're going to work for real, now."

Airboats and airships flocked to Sickle Mountain; some of them
hastened back to Port Carpenter for loads of food, for there was none
in the storehouses at the embarkation camp. They inspected ship after
ship, and chose two three-hundred-footers. They sent airships and
freight-scows to the dozen-odd cities and industrial centers that had
been already explored, to gather cargo, as far as possible the items
in shortest supply on Poictesme.

"Don't worry about a market smash," his father told him. "We have that
taken care of. Trisystem Investments has just bought up a lot of stock
in both of those companies, and we've set up agreements with
them--informally, of course; we'll have to get them voted on by our
own companies--to sell them ships from Koshchei. In return, the
company that's building the ship out of four air-freighters will go to
Janicot, and the company that's building a ship out of the old
Leitzenring Building will go to Jurgen, and they'll both stay off
Koshchei. Sterber, Flynn & Chen-Wong will probably be defending
antitrust suits till the end of time. The Planetary Government has
stopped liking us, you know."

"Then we'll have to get one that will like us. There'll be an election
about this time next year, won't there?"

His father nodded. "To use one of your expressions, we're working on
it. How soon can you get your ships in?"

"Well be loaded and ready to lift off in a week. Another week for the
trip."

"Well, don't forget that equipment you promised Kurt Fawzi."

"We'll have that on. Jerry Rivas is gathering it up now."

"How are you fixed for arms on Koshchei?"

"Arms? Why, there are some. There was a pretty big force of Space
Marines on duty here, and they left everything they couldn't carry in
their hands. Why? The Armageddonists and the Cybernarchists and Human
Supremacy bought all you had on hand?"

"They're buying, but I wasn't thinking of that. I was thinking that
your crews might need something to argue their way off the ships at
Storisende with. Things are getting just slightly rugged here, now."




XVII


There were no bands or speeches when they came in this time. A lot of
contragravity vehicles circled widely around the spaceport, but except
for a few news-service cars, the police were keeping them back of a
two-mile radius around the landing-pits. A couple of gunboats were
making tight circles above, and on the dock were more vehicles and a
horde of police and guards.

When Rodney Maxwell came across the bridge from the dock after they
opened the airlocks, he was followed by a dozen Barton-Massarra
private police, as villainous-looking a collection of ruffians as Conn
had ever seen. He was wearing a new suit, with a waist-length jacket
instead of the long coat he usually wore, and there was a holstered
automatic on each hip. In Litchfield, he never carried more than one
pistol, and Storisende was supposed to be an orderly place where
nobody needed to go armed. More than anything else, that told Conn
approximately what had been going on while he had been on Koshchei.

"Ship-guard," his father told Yves Jacquemont. "All your crew can come
off; they'll take care of things. Get your people in that troop
carrier over there. Everybody will stay at Interplanetary Building.
None of the hotels are safe, not even the Ritz-Gartner. And be sure
everybody's well armed when they come off the ship."

Jacquemont nodded. "I know the drill; I've been in Port Oberth on
Venus and Skorvann on Loki. Any law we want, we make for ourselves."

"That's about it. I'll see you there. Conn, I wish you'd come with me.
Somebody here wants to talk to you."

He wondered if his mother, or Flora, had come to Storisende. When he
asked his father as they crossed onto the dock, there was a brief
twinge of pain in Rodney Maxwell's face.

"No, they're not having anything to do--_Duck; quick!_"

Then his father was diving under a lifter-truck that stood empty on
the dock. The private police were scattering for cover, and an
auto-cannon began pom-pomming. Conn took one quick look in the
direction in which it was firing, saw an aircar that had broken
through the police line and was rushing toward them, and dived under
the lifter after his father. As he did, he saw a missile flash out
from one of the gunboats like a thrown knife. Then he huddled beside
his father and put his arms over his head.

He felt the heat and shock of the explosion and, an instant later,
heard the roar. When nothing immediately disastrous happened after he
had counted fifteen seconds, he stuck his head out and looked up. The
gunboat was struggling to regain her equilibrium, and the aircar had
vanished in a fireball. They both emerged, straightening. His father
was brushing himself with his hands and saying something about always
having to duck under something when he had a new suit on.

"Robot control, probably; could have been launched from anywhere in
town. Why, no; your mother and Flora aren't speaking to either of us,
any more. Pity, of course, but I'm glad they're in Litchfield. It's a
little healthier there."

They walked to the slim recon-car and climbed in, pulling the door
shut after them. Wade Lucas was waiting for them at the controls.

"There, you see!" he began, as soon as he had the car lifting. "What
I've been telling you. We'll have to stop this."

"Conn, meet our new partner. I told him everything you told me, out on
the Mall, the day you came home. I had to," his father hastened to
add. "He'd figured most of it out for himself. The only thing to do
was admit him to the lodge and give him the oath."

"I didn't know about General Travis; I didn't even know he was still
alive," Lucas said. "But the rest of it was pretty obvious, once I
stopped jumping to conclusions and did a little thinking. You know,
ever since I came here I've been preaching to these people to stop
looking for Merlin and do something to help themselves. You're smarter
than I am, Conn; instead of opposing them, you're guiding them."

"Did you tell Flora?"

Lucas shook his head. "I tried to explain what you're trying to do,
but she wouldn't listen. She just told me I'd gotten to be as big a
crook as you two." He had the car up to fifty thousand; putting it
into a wide circle around the city, he locked the controls and got out
his cigarettes. "Rod, we've got to stop this. You were just lucky this
time. Some of these days your luck's going to run out."

"How can we stop?" Conn demanded. "Tell them the truth? They'd lynch
us, and then go on hunting for Merlin."

"Worse than that; it'd be a smash worse than the one when the War
ended. I was only ten then, but I can remember that very plainly. We
can't stop it, and we wouldn't dare stop it if we could."

"What's been going on here in the last month?" Conn asked. "I've been
too busy to keep in touch. I know there's been rioting, and these
crackpot sects, but...."

"I think this is personal to us. There have been some ugly things
happening. There were four attempts to burglarize our offices. I told
you about some of the other stuff, the microphones we found, and so
on. The worst thing was Lucy Nocero, my secretary. She just vanished,
a couple of weeks ago. Three days later, the police found her
wandering in a park, a complete imbecile. Somebody who either didn't
know how to use one or didn't care what happened had used a mind-probe
on her. It's twenty to one she'll never recover."

"It's this Storisende financial crowd," Wade Lucas said. "They had
things all their own way till Alpha-Interplanetary was organized. Now
they're getting shoved into the background, and they don't like it."

"They're making more money than they ever did, and they just love it,"
Rodney Maxwell said. "I'd think it was either Jake Vyckhoven or Sam
Murchison."

"Murchison!" Lucas hooted. "Why, he's nobody! Federation
Minister-General; all the authority of the Terran Federation, and
nothing to enforce it with. He doesn't have a position, here; he has a
disease. Sleeping sickness."

"He certainly doesn't believe there is a Merlin, does he?" Conn asked.

"I don't know what he believes, but he's getting to be Klem Zareff's
opposite number. He thinks this whole thing's a plot against the
Federation. It's a good thing Klem didn't get around to repainting his
combat vehicles black and green, the way he did the Home Guard stuff
at Litchfield."

"I'd be more likely to think it was Vyckhoven."

"Could be. Or it could be the Armageddonists, or Human Supremacy; I am
ashamed to say that this heil-Merlin Cybernarchist gang are friendly
to us. Or it could be some of the banking crowd, or some of these
rival space-companies. Barton-Massarra is trying to find out. Well, we
have some of Wade's pet suspects at Interplanetary Building now.
There's been a meeting going for the last week to partition the Alpha
Gartner System."

The Interplanetary Building had been a medium-class residence hotel at
the time of the War. Junior staff officers and civilian technicians
and their families had lived there. It had been vacant ever since the
disastrous outbreak of peace. Now it had a big new fluorolite sign,
and housed the offices of all the Maxwell companies. There was a
truculent display of anti-vehicle weapons on the top landing stage,
and more Barton-Massarra private police. They looked even more
villainous then the ones at the spaceport. Conn recalled having heard
that most of the Blackie Perales gang had been discharged for lack of
evidence; he wondered how many of them had hired with Barton-Massarra.

The meeting was in a big conference room six floors down; it had been
going on uninterrupted for days, with all the interested companies'
representatives standing watch-and-watch around the clock. Lester
Dawes and Morgan Gatworth and Lorenzo Menardes were there for L. E. &
S.; Transcontinent & Overseas was represented; there were people from
Alpha-Interplanetary, and bankers and financiers, and people from the
companies building the two ships at the spaceport. And J. Fitzwilliam
Sterber, the lawyer.

And reporters, phoning stories in and getting audiovisual interviews
of anybody who would hold still long enough. They converged in a rush
as Conn and his father and Lucas came in.

"No statement, gentlemen!" Rodney Maxwell shouted, above the babble of
their questions. "When we have anything to release, it will be
released to all of you."

Jacquemont and Nichols had already arrived; Lucas went to them and
began talking about stevedores and lifters to get off the cargoes from
the ships. Conn hastened to join them.

"The scanning and mining equipment aboard the _Helen O'Loy_," he said.
"That shouldn't be unloaded here; we'll take the ship out to Force
Command and unload it there."

Out of the corner of his eye, he saw, a lurking reporter snatch the
handphone off his radio and begin talking; it would be stated
authoritatively that Merlin was at Force Command and would be
uncovered as soon as special equipment from Koshchei arrived.

Everybody at the long table was shouting at everybody else. The Jurgen
and Janicot Companies wanted to buy ships from Koshchei Exploitation &
Development. The Alpha-Interplanetary director, who was also a
vice-president of Transcontinent & Overseas, opposed that; another
director of A-I, who was also board chairman of Koshchei Exploitation
& Development, wanted to sell ships to anybody who had the price, the
Transcontinent & Overseas man was calling him a traitor to the
company, and one of the stockbrokers, who was also a vice-president of
Trisystem Investments and a director of Trisystem & Interstellar
Spacelines, was wanting to know which company. And a banker who was
stockholder in all the companies was shouting that they were all a
gang of crooks, and J. Fitzwilliam Sterber was declaring that anybody
who called him a crook could continue the discussion through seconds.

Conn suddenly realized that dueling had never been illegal on
Poictesme. He wondered how many duels this meeting was going to hatch.

The next afternoon the _Helen O'Loy_ was unloaded, all but the mining
equipment; Conn and Yves Jacquemont and Charley Gatworth and a few
others took her out to Force Command. They were met by Klem Zareff's
armed airboats two hundred and fifty miles from the mesa, and they
found the place in more of a state of siege than when the Badlands had
been full of outlaws. A lot of heavy armament seemed to have been
moved in from Barathrum Spaceport, and Zareff had more men and
firepower than he had ever commanded during the System States War. If
Minister-General Murchison was convinced that the Merlin excitement
was a cover for some seditious plot against the Federation, this ought
to give him food for thought.

There was still work, mostly boring lateral shafts for echo shots,
going on at the butte, under the relay station. That was Leibert, who
was still insisting that that was where Merlin was buried. There was
also some work on top of the mesa, by those who were convinced that
that was where Merlin was to be found. Kurt Fawzi was taking the lead
in that. Franz Veltrin and Dolf Kellton sided with Leibert, and
Fawzi's office clique had split into two factions. Judge Ledue was
maintaining strict impartiality, as befitted his judicial position.

"Why hasn't your father gotten those detectives of his to work on this
fake preacher?" Zareff wanted to know, when he and Tom Brangwyn were
able to talk to Conn alone.

"Well, they've been busy," Conn said. "Trying to keep him alive, for
one thing. You heard about the robo-bomb somebody launched at us the
day we brought the ships in, didn't you?"

"Yes, and we heard about the Nocero girl, too," Brangwyn said. "But
hasn't it ever occurred to you or your dad that this fellow that calls
himself Leibert might be mixed up with the gang that did that?"

"You suspect him, too?"

Brangwyn nodded. "I took a few audiovisuals of him, when he didn't
know it; I sent them to some different law-enforcement people over in
Morven, where he says he comes from. They never saw him before, and
couldn't find anybody who did."

"Well? He just doesn't have a police record, then."

"He says he's a preacher. Preachers don't go off in the woods by
themselves to preach; they get up in pulpits, in front of a lot of
people. Those towns over in Morven are small enough for everybody to
have known something about him. He's a fake, I tell you."

"Let me have copies of those audiovisuals, Tom. I'll see what can be
found out about him. I'm beginning to wonder about him myself. I'm
sure I've seen him, somewhere...."

When he got back to Storisende, he found that the marathon conference
on the sixth floor down at the Interplanetary Building had finally
come to an end. Everybody seemed satisfied, and apparently nobody was
going to have pistols and coffee with anybody else about it.

"We have things fixed up," his father told him. "The gang who are
building the ship out of four air-freighters are chartered as Janicot
Industries, Ltd.; they're going to specialize in chemical products.
The other company has a charter now, too. They're going to operate on
Jurgen and Horvendile. We'll sell them ships, and Alpha-Interplanetary
will put on scheduled trips to all three planets and also Koshchei.
We're getting along very nicely with them, except that everybody's
competing for technicians and skilled labor. We have two hundred more
people signed up for Koshchei. What you want to do is train as many of
them as you can for ship-operation. Alpha-Interplanetary is going to
start a training program here at Storisende; you'd better leave one of
your ships for them to work on, and send back as many ships as you can
find officers and crews for."

"We're getting things really started."

"Yes. The only trouble is...." His father frowned. "I don't understand
these people, Conn. Everybody ought to be making millions out of this
by this time next year, but all any of them, even these Storisende
bankers, can talk about is how soon we're going to find Merlin."

"I wish we could stop that, somehow. Listen; I have it. Merlin never
was on Poictesme; Merlin was a space-station a few thousand miles
off-planet; there was a crew of operators aboard, and they
communicated with Force Command by radio. When the War ended, they
took it outside the system and shot off a planetbuster inside her. No
more Merlin. How would that be?"

His father shook his head. "Wouldn't do. If anybody believed it, which
I doubt, they'd just quit. The market would collapse, everybody would
be broke, it would just be the end of the War all over again. Conn, we
can't let it stop now. We're going too fast to stop; if we tried it,
we'd smash up and break our necks."




XVIII


Jerry Rivas, Mack Vibart and Luther Chen-Wong had been keeping things
running on Koshchei. Work on the interplanetary ship at Port
Carpenter had stopped when the Sickle Mountain ships had been found;
it had never been resumed. When Conn returned, he found work started
on the _Ouroboros II_. Some of the two hundred newcomers who came in
on the _Helen O'Loy_ had special skills needed on the hypership; most
of them went with Clyde Nichols and Charley Gatworth to Sickle
Mountain to train as normal-space officers and crewmen. Some of them,
it was hoped, would later qualify for hyperspace work. Sylvie, who had
been one of the star pupils in the computer class, was now helping him
with the long lists of needed materials, some of which had to be
brought from other places as much as a thousand miles away. Jerry
Rivas went back to exploring; Nichols had to drop his space-training
work temporarily to organize a fleet of air-freighters; usually, the
men best able to operate them were urgently needed on some job at the
construction dock.

Ships lifted out almost daily from Sickle Mountain. They tried to get
some kind of salable cargo for each one, without depriving themselves
of what they needed for themselves. Some of the ships came back loaded
with provisions and bringing new recruits--for instance, the teaching
of physics and mathematics almost stopped at Storisende College
because the professors had been virtually shanghaied.

Conn found himself losing touch with affairs on Poictesme. Ships had
landed on both Janicot and Horvendile and were sending back claims to
abandoned factories. By that time they had all the decks into the
_Ouroboros II_, and he was working aboard, getting the astrogational
and hyperspace instruments put in place. The hypership _Andromeda_ was
back from the Gamma System; there was close secrecy about what the
expedition had found, but the newscasts were full of conjectures about
Merlin, and the market went into another dizzy upward spiral.
Litchfield Exploration & Salvage opened a huge munitions depot, and
combat equipment, once almost unsalable, was selling as fast as it
came out. The Government was buying some, but by no means all of it.

"Conn, can you come back here to Poictesme for a while?" his father
asked. "Things have turned serious. I don't like to talk about it by
screen--too many people know our scrambler combinations. But I wish
you were here."

He started to object; there were millions, well, a couple of hundred,
things he had to attend to. The look on his father's face stopped him.

"Ship leaving Sickle Mountain tomorrow morning," he said. "I'll be
aboard."

The voyage back to Poictesme was a needed rest. He felt refreshed when
he got off at Storisende Spaceport and was met by his father and Wade
Lucas in one of the slim recon-cars. They greeted him briefly and took
the car up and away from the city, where it was safe to talk.

"Conn, I'm scared," his father said. "I'm beginning to think there
really is a Merlin, after all."

"Oh, come off it! I know it's contagious, but I thought you'd been
vaccinated."

"I'm beginning to think so, too," Lucas said. "I don't like it at
all."

"You know what that gang who took the _Andromeda_ to Panurge found?"

"They were looking for the plant that fabricated the elements for
Merlin, weren't they?"

"Yes. They found it. My Barton-Massarra operatives got to some of the
crew. This place had been turning out material for a computer of
absolutely unconventional design; the two computermen they had with
them couldn't make head or tail of half of it. And every blueprint,
every diagram, every scrap of writing or recording, had been
destroyed. But they found one thing, a big empty fiber folder that had
fallen under something and been overlooked. It was marked: TOP
SECRET. PROJECT MERLIN."

"Project Merlin could have been anything," Conn started to say. No.
Project Merlin was something they made computer parts for.

"Dolf Kellton's research crew, at the Library here, came across some
references to Project Merlin, too. For instance, there was a routine
division court-martial, a couple of second lieutenants, on a very
trivial charge. Force Command ordered the court-martial stopped, and
the two officers simply dropped out of the Third Force records, it was
stated that they were engaged in work connected with Project Merlin.
That's an example; there were half a dozen things like that."

"Tell him what Kurt Fawzi and his crew found," Wade Lucas said.

"Yes. They have a fifty-foot shaft down from the top of the mesa
almost to the top of the underground headquarters. They found
something on top of the headquarters; a disc-shaped mass, fifty feet
thick and a hundred across, armored in collapsium. It's directly over
what used to be Foxx Travis's office."

"That's not a tenth big enough for anything that could even resemble
Merlin."

"Well, it's something. I was out there day before yesterday. They're
down to the collapsium on top of this thing; I rode down the shaft in
a jeep and looked at it. Look, Conn, we don't know what this Project
Merlin was; all this lore about Merlin that's grown up since the War
is pure supposition."

"But Foxx Travis told me, categorically, that there was no Merlin
Project," Conn said. "The War's been over forty years; it's not a
military secret any longer. Why would he lie to me?"

"Why did you lie to Kurt Fawzi and the others and tell them there was
a Merlin? You lied because telling the truth would hurt them. Maybe
Travis had the same reason for lying to you. Maybe Merlin's too
dangerous for anybody to be allowed to find."

"Great Ghu, are you beginning to think Merlin is the Devil, or
Frankenstein's Monster?"

"It might be something just as bad. Maybe worse. I don't think a man
like Foxx Travis would lie if he didn't have some overriding moral
obligation to."

"And we know who's been making most of the trouble for us, too," Lucas
added.

"Yes," Rodney Maxwell said, "we do. And sometime I'm going to invite
Klem Zareff to kick my pants-seat. Sam Murchison, the Terran
Federation Minister-General."

"How'd you get that?"

"Barton-Massarra got some of it; they have an operative planted in
Murchison's office. And some of our banking friends got the rest. This
Human Supremacy League is being financed by somebody. Every so often,
their treasurer makes a big deposit at one of the banks here, all
Federation currency, big denomination notes. When I asked them to,
they started keeping a record of the serial numbers and checking
withdrawals. The money was paid out, at the First Planetary Bank, to
Mr. Samuel S. Murchison, in person. The Armegeddonists are getting
money, too, but they're too foxy to put theirs through the banks. I
believe they're the ones who mind-probed Lucy Nocero. Barton-Massarra
believe, but they can't prove, that Human Supremacy launched that
robo-bomb at us, that time at the spaceport."

"Have you done anything with those audiovisuals of Leibert?"

"Gave them to Barton-Massarra. They haven't gotten anything, yet."

"So we have to admit that Klem wasn't crazy after all. What do you
want me to do?"

"Go out to Force Command and take charge. We have to assume that there
may be a Merlin, we have to assume that it may be dangerous, and we
have to assume that Kurt Fawzi and his covey of Merlinolators are just
before digging it up. Your job is to see that whatever it is doesn't
get loose."

The trouble was, if he started giving orders around Force Command he'd
stop being a brilliant young man and become a half-baked kid, and one
word from him and the older and wiser heads would do just what they
pleased. He wondered if the pro-Leibert and anti-Leibert factions were
still squabbling; maybe if he went out of his way to antagonize one
side, he'd make allies of the other. He took the precaution of
screening in, first; Kurt Fawzi, with whom he talked, was almost
incoherent with excitement. At least, he was reasonably sure that none
of Klem Zareff's trigger-happy mercenaries would shoot him down coming
in.

The well, fifty feet in diameter, went straight down from the top of
the mesa; as the headquarters had been buried under loose rubble,
they'd had to vitrify the sides going down. He let down into the hole
in a jeep, and stood on the collapsium roof of whatever it was they
had found. It wasn't the top of the headquarters itself; the microray
scannings showed that. It was a drum-shaped superstructure, a sort of
underground penthouse. And there they were stopped. You didn't cut
collapsium with a cold chisel, or even an atomic torch. He began to
see how he was going to be able to take charge here.

"You haven't found any passage leading into it?" he asked, when they
were gathered in Fawzi's--formerly Foxx Travis's--office.

"Nifflheim, no! If we had, we'd be inside now." Tom Brangwyn swore.
"And we've been all over the ceiling in here, and we can't find
anything but vitrified rock and then the collapsium shielding."

"Sure. There are collapsium-cutters, at Port Carpenter, on Koshchei.
They do it with cosmic rays."

"But collapsium will stop cosmic rays," Zareff objected.

"Stop them from penetrating, yes. A collapsium-cutter doesn't
penetrate; it abrades. Throws out a rotary beam and works like a
grinding-wheel, or a buzz-saw."

"Well, could you get one down that hole?" Judge Ledue asked.

He laughed. "No. The thing is rather too large. In the first place,
there's a full-sized power-reactor, and a mass-energy converter. With
them, you produce negamatter--atoms with negatively charged protons
and positive electrons, positrons. Then, you have to bring them into
contact with normal positive-matte--That's done in a chamber the size
of a fifty-gallon barrel, made of collapsium and weighing about a
hundred tons. Then you have to have a pseudograv field to impart
rotary motion to your cosmic-ray beam, and the generator door that
would lift ten ships the size of the _Lester Dawes_. Then you need
another fifty to a hundred tons of collapsium to shield your
cutting-head. The cutting-head alone weighs three tons. The rotary
beam that does the cutting," he mentioned as an afterthought, "is
about the size of a silver five-centisol piece."

Nobody said anything for a few seconds. Carl Leibert stated that
Divine Power would aid them. Nobody paid much attention; Leibert's
stock seemed to have gone bearish since he had found nothing in the
butte and Fawzi had found that whatever-it-was on top of Force
Command.

"Means we're going to dig the whole blasted top off, clear down to
where that thing is," Zareff said. "That'll take a year."

"Oh, no. Maybe a couple of weeks, after we get started," Conn told
them. "It'll take longer to get the stuff loaded on a ship and hauled
here than it will to get that thing uncovered and opened."

He told them about the machines they used in the iron mines on
Koshchei, and as he talked, he stopped worrying about how he was going
to take charge here. He had just been unanimously elected
Indispensable Man.

"Bless you, young man!" Carl Leibert cried. "At last, the Great
Computer! Those who come after will reckon this the Year Zero of the
Age of Regeneration. I will go to my chamber and return thanks in
prayer."

"He's been doing a lot of praying lately," Tom Brangwyn remarked,
after Leibert had gone out. "He's moved into the chaplain's quarters,
back of the pandenominational chapel on the fourth level down. Always
keeps his door locked, too."

"Well, if he wants privacy for his devotions, that's his business.
Maybe we could all do with a little prayer," Veltrin said.

"Probably praying to Sam Murchison by radio," Klem Zareff retorted.
"I'd like to see inside those rooms of his."

He called Yves Jacquemont at Port Carpenter after dinner. When he told
Jacquemont what he wanted and why, the engineer remarked that it was a
pity screens couldn't be fitted with olfactory sensors, so that he
could smell Conn's breath.

"I am not drunk. I am not crazy. And I am not exercising my sense of
humor. I don't know what Fawzi and his gang have here, but if it isn't
Merlin it's something just as hot. We want at it, soonest, and we'll
have to dig a couple of hundred feet of rock off it and open a
collapsium can."

"How are we going to get that stuff on a ship?"

"Anything been done to that normal-space job we started since I saw it
last? Can you find engines for it? And is there anything about those
mining machines or the cutter that would be damaged by space-radiation
or re-entry heat?"

Yves Jacquemont was silent for a good deal longer than the
interplanetary time-lag warranted. Finally he nodded.

"I get it, Conn. We won't put the things in a ship; we'll build a ship
around them. No; that stuff can all be hauled open to space. They use
things like that at space stations and on asteroids and all sorts of
places. We'll have to stop work on _Ouroboros_, though."

"Let _Ouroboros_ wait. We are going to dig up Merlin, and then
everybody is going to be rich and happy, and live happily forever
after."

Jacquemont looked at him, silent again for longer than the usual five
and a half minutes.

"You almost said that with a straight face." After all, Jacquemont
hadn't been cleared yet for the Awful Truth About Merlin, but, like
his daughter, he'd been doing some guessing. "I wish I knew how much
of this Merlin stuff you believe."

"So do I, Yves. Maybe after we get this thing open, I'll know."

To give himself a margin of safety, Jacquemont had estimated the
arrival of the equipment at three weeks. A week later, he was
on-screen to report that the skeleton ship--they had christened her
_The Thing_, and when Conn saw screen views of her he understood
why--was finished and the collapsium-cutter and two big mining
machines were aboard. Evidently nobody on Koshchei had done a stroke
of work on anything else.

"Sylvie's coming along with her; so are Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes and
Ham Matsui and Gomez and Karanja and four or five others. They'll be
ready to go to work as soon as she lands and unloads," Jacquemont
added.

That was good; they were all his own people, unconnected with any of
the Merlin-hunting factions at Force Command. In case trouble started,
he could rely on them.

"Well, dig out some shootin'-irons for them," he advised. "They may
need them here."

Depending, of course, on what they found when they opened that
collapsium can on top of Force Command, and how the people there
reacted to it.

_The Thing_ took a hundred and seventy hours to make the trip;
conditions in the small shielded living quarters and control cabin
were apparently worse than on the _Harriet Barne_ on her second trip
to Koschchei. Everybody at Force Command was anxious and excited. Carl
Leibert kept to his quarters most of the time, as though he had to
pray the ship across space.

At the same time, reports of the near completion of _Ouroboros II_
were monopolizing the newscasts, to distract public attention from
what was happening at Force Command. Cargo was being collected for
her; instead of washing their feet in brandy, next year people would
be drinking water. Lorenzo Menardes had emptied his warehouses of
everything over a year old; so had most of the other distillers up and
down the Gordon Valley. Melon and tobacco planters were talking about
breaking new ground and increasing their cultivated acreage for the
next year. Agricultural machinery was in demand and bringing high
prices. So were stills, and tobacco-factory machinery. It began to
look as though the Maxwell Plan was really getting started.

It was decided to send the hypership to Baldur on her first voyage;
that was Wade Lucas's suggestion. He was going with her himself, to
recruit scientific and technical graduates from his alma mater, the
University of Paris-on-Baldur, and from the other schools there. Conn
was enthusiastic about that, remembering the so-called engineers on
Koshchei, running around with a monkey-wrench in one hand and a
textbook in the other, trying to find out what they were supposed to
do while they were doing it. Poictesme had been living for too long on
the leavings of wartime production; too few people had bothered
learning how to produce anything.

_The Thing_ finally settled onto the mesa-top. It looked like
something from an old picture of the construction work on one of the
Terran space-stations in the First Century. Immediately, every piece
of contragravity equipment in the place converged on her; men dangled
on safety lines hundreds of feet above the ground, cutting away beams
and braces with torches. The two giant mining machines, one after the
other, floated free on their own contragravity and settled into place.
_The Thing_ lifted, still carrying the collapsium-cutting equipment,
and came to rest on the brush-grown flat beyond, out of the way.

If Yves Jacquemont had overestimated the time required to get the
equipment loaded and lifted off from Koshchei, Conn had been
overoptimistic about the speed with which the top of the mesa could be
stripped off. Digging away the rubble with which the pit had been
filled, and even the solid rock around it, was easier than getting the
stuff out of the way. Farm-scows came in from all over, as fast as
they and pilots for them could be found; the rush to get brandy and
tobacco to Storisende had caused an acute shortage of vehicles.

One by one, the members of the old Fawzi's Office gang came drifting
in--Lorenzo Menardes, Morgan Gatworth, Lester Dawes. None of them had
any skills to contribute, but they brought plenty of enthusiasm.
Rodney Maxwell came whizzing out from Storisende now and then to watch
the progress of the work. Of all the crowd, he and Conn watched the
two steel giants strip away the tableland with apprehension instead of
hope. No, there was a third. Carl Leibert had stopped secluding
himself in his quarters; he still talked rapturously about the
miracles Merlin would work, but now and then Conn saw him when he
thought he was unobserved. His face was the face of a condemned man.

The _Ouroboros II_ was finished. The whole planet saw, by
screen, the ship lift out; watched from the ship the dwindling away
of Koshchei and saw Poictesme grow ahead of her. Twelve hours before
she landed, work at Force Command stopped. Everybody was going to
Storisende--Sylvie, whose father would command her on her voyage to
Baldur, Morgan Gatworth, whose son would be first officer and
astrogator, everybody. Except Carl Leibert.

"Then I'm not going either," Klem Zareff decided. "Somebody's got to
stay here and keep an eye on that snake."

"No, nor me," Tom Brangwyn said. "And if he starts praying again, I'm
going to go and pray along with him."

Conn stayed, too, and so did Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes. They watched
the newscast of the lift-out, a week later. It was peaceful and
harmonious; everybody, regardless of their attitudes on Merlin, seemed
agreed that this was the beginning of a new prosperity for the planet.
There were speeches. The bands played "Genji Gartner's Body," and the
"Spaceman's Hymn."

And, at the last, when the officers and crew were going aboard, Conn
saw his sister Flora clinging to Wade Lucas's arm. She was one of the
small party who went aboard for a final farewell. When she came off,
along with Sylvie, she was wiping her eyes, and Sylvie was comforting
her. Seeing that made Conn feel better even than watching the ship
itself lift away from Storisende.




XIX


When Sylvie returned from Storisende, she had Flora with her. Conn's
sister greeted him embarrassedly; Sylvie led both of them out of the
crowd and over to the edge of the excavation.

"Go ahead, Flora," she urged. "Make up with Conn. It won't be any
harder than making up with Wade was."

"How did that happen, by the way?" Conn asked.

"Your girlfriend," Flora said. "She came to the house and practically
forced me into a car and flew me into Storisende, and then made me
keep quiet and listen while Wade told me the truth."

"I wasn't completely sure what the truth was myself till Wade opened
up," Sylvie admitted. "I had a pretty good idea, though."

"I always hated that Merlin thing," Flora burst out. "All those old
men in Fawzi's office, dreaming about the wonderful things Merlin was
going to do, with everything crumbling around them and everybody
getting poorer every year, and doing nothing, nothing! And when you
were coming home, I was expecting you to tell them there was no Merlin
and to go to work and do something for themselves. But you didn't, and
I couldn't see what you were trying to do. And then when Wade joined
you and Father, I thought he was either helping you put over some kind
of a swindle or else he'd started believing in Merlin himself. I
should have seen what you were trying to do from the beginning. At
least, from when you talked them into cleaning the town up and fixing
the escalators and getting the fountains going again."

So the fountains weren't dusty any more.

"How's Mother taking things now?"

Flora looked distressed. "She goes around wringing her hands.
Honestly. I never saw anybody doing that outside a soap opera. Half
the time she thinks you and Father are a pair of unprincipled
scoundrels, and the other half she thinks you're going to let Merlin
destroy the world."

"I'm beginning to be afraid of something like that myself."

"Huh? But Merlin's just a big fake, isn't it? You're using it to make
these people do something they wouldn't do for themselves, aren't
you?"

"It started that way. What do you think all this is about?" he asked,
gesturing toward the excavation and the two giant mining machines
digging and blasting and pounding away at the rock.

"Well, to keep Kurt Fawzi and that crowd happy, I suppose. It seems
like an awful waste of time, though."

"I'm afraid it isn't. I'm afraid Merlin, or something just as bad, is
down there. That's why I'm here, instead of on Koshchei. I want to
keep people like Fawzi from doing anything foolish with it when they
find it."

"But there _can't_ be a Merlin!"

"I'm afraid there is. Not the sort of a Merlin Fawzi expects to find;
that thing's too small for that. But there's something down there...."

The question of size bothered him. That drum-shaped superstructure
couldn't even hold the personnel-record machine they had found here,
or the computers at the Storisende Stock Exchange. It could have been
an intelligence-evaluator, or an enemy-intentions predictor, but it
seemed small even for that. It would be something _like_ a computer;
that was as far as he was able to go. And it could be something
completely outside the reach of his imagination.

At the back of his mind, the suspicion grew that Carl Leibert knew
exactly what it was. And he became more and more convinced that he had
seen the self-styled preacher before.

Finally, the whole top of the hundred-foot collapsium-covered
structure was uncovered, and the excavation had been leveled out wide
enough to accommodate all the massive paraphernalia of the
collapsium-cutter. They put _The Thing_ onto contragravity again, and
brought her down in place; the work of lifting off the reactor and the
converter and the rest of it, piece by piece, began. Finally,
everything was set up.

A dozen and a half of them were gathered in the room that had become
their meeting-place, after dinner. They were all too tired to start
the cutting that night, and at the same time excited and anxious. They
talked in disconnected snatches, and then somebody put on one of the
telecast screens. A music program was just ending; there was a brief
silence, and then a commentator appeared, identifying his
news-service. He spoke rapidly and breathlessly, his professional
gravity cracking all over.

"The hypership _City of Asgard_, from Aton, has just come into
telecast range," he began. "We have received an exclusive Interworld
News Service story, recently brought to Aton on the Pan-Federation
Spacelines ship _Magellanic_, from Terra.

"News of revived interest in the Third Force computer, Merlin, having
reached Terra by way of Odin, representatives of Interworld News, to
which this service subscribes, interviewed retired Force-General Foxx
Travis, now living, at the advanced age of a hundred and fourteen, on
Luna. General Travis, who commanded the Third Fleet-Army Force here
during the War, categorically denied that there had ever existed any
super-computer of the sort.

"We bring you, now, a recorded interview with General Travis, made on
Luna...."

For an instant, Conn felt the room around him whirling dizzily, and
then he caught hold of himself. Everybody else was shouting in sudden
consternation, and then everybody was hushing everybody else and
making twice as much noise. The screen flickered; the commentator
vanished, and instead, seated in the deep-cushioned chair, was the
thin and frail old man with whom Conn had talked two years before, and
through an open segment of the dome-roof behind him the full Earth
shone, the continents of the Western Hemisphere plainly
distinguishable. A young woman in starchy nurse's white bent forward
solicitously from beside the chair, handing him a small beaker from
which he sipped some stimulant. He looked much as he had when Conn had
talked to him. But there was something missing....

Oh, yes. The comparative youngster of seventy-some--"Mike Shanlee ...
my _aide-de-camp_ on Poictesme ... now he thinks he's my keeper...."
He wasn't in evidence, and he should be. Then Conn knew where and when
he had seen the man who claimed to be a preacher named Carl Leibert.

"There is absolutely no truth in it, gentlemen," Travis was saying.
"There never was any such computer. I only wish there had been; it
would have shortened the War by years. We did, of course, use
computers of all sorts, but they were all the conventional types used
by business organizations...."

The rest was lost in a new outburst of shouting: General Travis, in
the screen, continued in dumb-show. The only thing Conn could
distinguish was Leibert's--Shanlee's--voice, screaming: "Can it be a
lie? Is there no Great Computer?" Then Kurt Fawzi was pounding on the
top of the desk and bellowing, "Shut up! Listen!"

"Frankly, I'm surprised," Travis was continuing. "Young Maxwell talked
to me, here in this room, a couple of years ago; I told him then that
nothing of the sort existed. If he's back on Poictesme telling people
there is, he's lying to them and taking advantage of their credulity.
There never was anything called Project Merlin...."

"Hah, who's a liar now?" Klem Zareff shouted. "Dolf, what did your
people find in the Library?"

"Why, that's right!" Professor Kellton exclaimed. "My students did
find a dozen references to Project Merlin. He couldn't be ignorant of
anything like that."

"This youth has been lying to us all along!" the old man with the
beard cried, pointing an accusing finger at Conn. "He has created
false hopes; he has given us faith in a delusion. Why, he is the
wickedest monster in human history!"

"Well, thank you, General Travis," another voice, from the
screen-speaker, was saying. The only calm voice in the room. "That was
a most excellent statement, sir. It should...."

"Conn, you didn't tell us you'd talked to General Travis," Morgan
Gatworth was saying. "Why didn't you?"

"Because I never believed anything he told me. You were in Kurt
Fawzi's office the day I came home; you know how shocked everybody was
when I told you I hadn't been able to learn anything positive. Why
should I repeat his lies and discourage everybody that much more? Why,
he'd deny there was a Merlin if he was sitting on top of it," Conn
declared. "He wants the credit for winning the War, not for letting
Merlin win it for him."

"I don't blame Conn," Klem Zareff said. "If he'd told us that then,
some of us might have believed it."

"And look what we found," Kurt Fawzi added, pointing at the ceiling.
"Is that Merlin up there, or isn't it?"

"That little thing!" Shanlee cried scornfully. "How could that be
Merlin? I am going to my chamber, to pray for forgiveness for this
wretch."

He turned and started for the door.

"Stop him, Tom!" Conn said, and Tom Brangwyn put himself in front of
the older man, gripping his right arm. Shanlee tried, briefly, to
resist.

"Seems to me you lost faith in Merlin awfully quick," the former town
marshal of Litchfield said. "You knew there was a Merlin all along,
and you never wanted us to find it."

Franz Veltrin, who had been "Leibert's" most enthusiastic adherent,
had also lost faith suddenly; he was shouting vituperation at the
Prophet of Merlin.

"Knock it off, Franz; he was only doing his duty," Conn said. "Weren't
you, General Shanlee?"

It took almost a minute before they stopped yelling for an explanation
and allowed him to make one. He caught Klem Zareff's comment: "Must be
pretty hot, if they have to send a general to handle it."

"I talked to Travis, yes. He gave me the same story he just repeated
on that interview," Conn said, picking his way carefully between fact
and fiction. "After I went back to Montevideo, he and this aide of his
must have been afraid I didn't believe it, which I didn't. When I was
ready to graduate, I got this offer of an instructorship; that was a
bribe to keep me on Terra and off Poictesme. When I turned it down and
took the _Mizar_ home, Travis sent Shanlee after me. He must have
grown that beard and that pageboy bob on the way out. I suppose he
contacted Murchison as soon as he landed. Wait a minute."

He went to the communication screen and punched out a combination. A
girl appeared and singsonged: "Barton-Massarra, Investigation and
Protection."

"Conn Maxwell here. We gave you some audiovisuals of a man with a
white beard, alias Carl Leibert," he began.

"Just a sec, Mr. Maxwell." She spoke quickly into a handphone. The
screen flickered, and she was replaced by a hard-faced young man in
dark clothes.

"Hello, Mr. Maxwell; Joe Massarra. We haven't anything on Leibert
yet."

"Are any of the officers of the _Andromeda_ where you can contact
them? Let them see those audiovisual. I'll bet that beard was grown
aboard ship coming out from Terra."

Bedlam broke out suddenly. Shanlee, who had been standing passively,
his right arm loosely grasped by Tom Brangwyn, came down on Brangwyn's
instep with the heel of his left foot and hit Brangwyn under the chin
with the heel of his left palm. Wrenching his arm free, he started for
the door. Sylvie Jacquemont snatched a chair and threw it along the
floor; it hit the fleeing man's ankles and brought him down. Half a
dozen men piled on top of him, and Brangwyn was yelling to them not to
choke him to death till he could answer some questions.

"Hey, what's going on?" the detective-agency man in the screen was
asking. "Need help? We'll start a car right away."

"Everything's under control, thank you."

Massarra hesitated for a moment. "What's the dope on this statement
that was on telecast a few minutes ago?" he asked.

"Travis doesn't want us to find Merlin. What you just heard was one of
his people, planted here at Force Command. We're going to question him
when we have time. But there isn't a word of truth in that statement
you just heard on the _Herald-Guardian_ newscast. Merlin exists, and
we've found it. We'll have it opened inside of thirty hours at most."

That was the line he was going to take with everybody. As soon as he
had Massarra off the screen, he was punching the combination of his
father's private screen at Interplanetary Building. It took five
interminable minutes before Rodney Maxwell came on. He could hear Klem
Zareff shouting orders into one of the inside communication
screens--general turnout, everything on combat-ready; guards to come
at once to the office.

"How close are you to digging that thing out?" his father asked as
soon as he appeared.

"We're down to it; we can start cutting the collapsium any time now."

"Start cutting it ten minutes ago," his father told him. "And don't
leave Force Command till you have it open. How many men and vehicles
does Klem have for defense? You'll need all of them in a couple of
hours. Everybody here is stunned, now; they'll come out of it inside
an hour, and they'll come out fighting."

"You'd better come out here." He turned, saw Jerry Rivas helping hold
Shanlee in a chair, and shouted to him: "Jerry! Turn out the workmen.
Start cutting the can open right away." He turned back to his father.
"Klem's just ordered all his force out. Are you coming here?"

"I can't. In about an hour, everything's going up with a bang. I have
to be here to grab a few of the pieces."

"You'll do a lot of good in jail, or on the end of a rope."

"Chance I have to take," his father replied. "I think I'll have a
couple of hours. If anybody from the press calls you, what are you
going to tell them?"

Conn repeated the line he had taken already. His father nodded.

"All right. I'll call you later. If I can. Just keep things going at
your end."

A dozen of Klem Zareff's men were crowding into the room.

"This man's under close arrest," the old soldier was telling them. "He
is very important and very dangerous. Take him out somewhere, search
him to the skin, take his clothes away from him and give him a robe.
He's to be watched every second; make sure he hasn't poison or other
suicide means. He's to be questioned later."

As soon as Rodney Maxwell was off the screen, there was a call-signal.
It was one of the news-services, wanting a statement.

"I'll take it," Gatworth said, and then began talking:

"This statement of General Travis's is completely false. There is a
Merlin, and we've found it...."

They found something that might be good-enough Merlin for the next
thirty hours. That superstructure was just big enough for the manually
operated parts of a computer like Merlin; the input and output, and
the programming machines.




XX


Klem Zareff's guardsmen were mercenaries. A little over a year ago
they had, at best, been homeless drifters, and not a few had been
outlaws. Now they were soldiers, well fed, clothed, quartered and
equipped, and well and regularly paid. They had a good thing; they
were willing to fight to keep it, Merlin or no Merlin. Conn left them
to their commander. He did gather the workmen for a short harangue,
but that wasn't really necessary. They had a good thing, too, and most
of them realized that they were working toward a better thing. They
could be depended upon, too.

They came crowding out and manned lifters; they got the heavy
collapsium-cutter maneuvered into place and the shielding down around
the cutting-head. After that, there were only four men who could work,
each in his own heavily shielded cabin. In spite of the shielding that
covered the actual work, there was an awesome display of multicolored
light; it was like being in the middle of an aurora borealis. What was
going on where that tiny rotating beam of cosmic rays was grinding at
the collapsium simply couldn't have been imagined.

Conn would have liked to stay outside; he could not. Too many things
were happening in too many places, and it was all coming in by screen.
Rioting had broken out in Storisende and in a dozen other places. He
saw, on a news-screen, a mob raging in front of the Executive Palace;
yellow-shirted Cybernarchists were battling with city police and
Planetary troops, Armageddonists and Human Supremacy Leaguers were
fighting both and one another. Above all the confused noise of
shouting and shooting, an amplifier was braying: "_It's a lie! It's a
lie! Merlin has been found!_" Newsmen began arriving--Zareff's men
had orders to pass them through the cordon that had been put up around
Force Command--and they took up his time. It was worth it, though.
They could tell him what was going on.

J. Fitzwilliam Sterber called. Rodney Maxwell had been arrested, on a
farrago of fraud charges--"I don't know who he's supposed to have
defrauded; the Planetary Government is the sole complainant"--and bail
was being illegally denied. Sterber's lawyerly soul was outraged, but
he was grimly elated. "You wait till things quiet down a little. We're
going to start a false-arrest suit--"

"If you're alive to." Apparently Sterber hadn't thought of that. "What
do you think's going to happen when the Stock Exchange opens?"

"It's going to be bad. But don't worry; your father must have foreseen
something like this. He gave me instructions, and instructed a few
more people." He named some of the Trisystem Investments people and
some of the bankers. "We're going to try to brace the market as long
as we can. Nobody who keeps his head is going to lose anything in the
long run."

Luther Chen-Wong called from Port Carpenter, on Koshchei. He and Clyde
Nichols and a young mathematics professor named Simon Macquarte had
been running the colony, in Conn's absence and since Yves Jacquemont
had gone to space in the _Ouroboros II_.

"Well, they caught up with you," he said. Evidently he had figured out
what the search for Merlin was all about, too. "What do we do about
it?"

"Well, we are just before finding Merlin, here. I hope we find it
before things get too bad." He told Luther the situation of the
moment. "Have you people started on another hypership yet?"

"We're getting organized to. I don't suppose it's advisable to send
any more ships in to Storisende for a while? And are you sure this
thing you've found is Merlin?"

"I don't know what it is. It's only big enough for the apparatus
they'd need to operate a thing like Merlin--Yes, Luther. I am sure we
have found Merlin."

Chen-Wong looked at him curiously. "I hope so. I can't think of
anything else that can stop this business."

Tom Brangwyn was in the room when he turned from the screen.

"We searched Leibert's--Shanlee's--rooms," he said. "We found a bomb."

"What kind of a bomb?"

"Vest-pocket thermonuclear. He seems to have gotten the fissionables
by taking apart a couple of light tactical missiles; the whole thing's
packed inside a hundred-pound power-cartridge case. It was in a
traveling-bag under his bed. And you know how it was to be fired? With
a regular 40-mm flare-pistol, welded into the end of the bomb. The
flare-powder had been taken out of the cartridge, and it had been
reloaded with a big charge of rifle-powder. I suppose it would blow
one subcritical mass into another. But the only way he could have
fired the bomb would have been by pulling the trigger."

And blowing himself up along with it. He must have wanted Merlin
destroyed pretty badly.

"Have you questioned him yet?"

"Not yet. I wanted to tell you about it first."

He looked at his watch. Only four hours had passed since the newscast;
why, that seemed like months, ago, now.

"All right, Tom; we'll go talk to him. Where's the Colonel?"

Zareff was surrounded by a dozen screens, keeping in touch with the
_Lester Dawes_ and the gunboats and combat cars, and the gun positions
with which he had ringed Force Command. It was only a little army,
maybe, but he was a busy commander-in-chief.

"You take care of it. Tell me what you get from him. I can't leave
now. There's a report of a number of aircraft approaching from the
west now...."

They found Judge Ledue, and Kurt Fawzi and Dolf Kellton, who were just
sitting around wishing there was something to do to help. They gave
Franz Veltrin and Sylvie Jacquemont the job of keeping the
representatives of the press amused. Then they went down to the room
in which General Mike Shanlee was held under guard.

Shanlee, wearing a bathrobe and nothing else, was lying on a cot,
sleeping peacefully; three of Zareff's men were sitting on chairs,
watching him narrowly.

"All right; you can go," Conn told them. "We'll take care of him."

Shanlee woke instantly; he sat up and swung his legs over the edge of
the cot.

"You have my name and rank," he said, and his voice no longer
quavered. "My serial number is--" He recited a string of figures. "And
that's all you're getting out of me."

"We'll get anything we want out of you," Conn told him. "You know what
a mind-probe is? You should; your accomplices used one on my father's
secretary. She's a hopeless imbecile now. You'll be, too, when we're
through with you. But before then, you'll have given us everything you
know."

Kellton began to protest. "Conn, you can't do a thing like that!"

"A mind-probe is utterly illegal; why, it's a capital offense!" Ledue
exclaimed. "Conn I forbid you...."

"Judge, don't make me call those guards and have you removed," Conn
said.

"You can stop bluffing," Shanlee told him. "Where would you get a
mind-probe?"

"Out of the Chief of Intelligence's office, here in his headquarters.
I should imagine it was to be used in interrogating Alliance
prisoners, during the War. I think Colonel Zareff would enjoy helping
to use it on you. He used to be an Alliance officer."

Shanlee was silent. Conn sat down in one of the chairs, at the small
table.

"General Shanlee, would you describe General Foxx Travis as a man of
honor and integrity? And would you so describe yourself?" Shanlee said
nothing. "Yet both of you have lied, deliberately and repeatedly, to
conceal the existence of Merlin. And we found that bomb in your room.
You were willing to blow up this headquarters and everybody, yourself
included, in it, to keep us from getting at Merlin. Well, you know
that we can make you tell us the truth, maybe when it's too late, and
you know that we are going to get Merlin. We're cutting the collapsium
off that thing above now."

Shanlee laughed. "You're supposed to be a computerman. You think that
little thing could be Merlin?"

"The controls and programming machine for Merlin." He turned to Kurt
Fawzi. "You always claimed that Merlin was here in Force Command. You
had it backward. Force Command is inside Merlin."

"What do you mean, Conn?"

"The walls; the fifty-foot walls, shielded inside and out. Merlin--the
circuitry, the memory-bank, the relays, everything--was installed
inside them. What's up above is only what was needed to operate the
computer. Isn't that true, General?"

Shanlee had stopped his derisive laughter. He sat on the edge of the
cot, tensing as though for a leap at Conn's throat.

"That won't help, either. If you try it, we won't shoot you. We'll
just overpower you and start mind-probing right away. Now; you feel
that suppressing Merlin was worth any sacrifice. We're not
unreasonable. If you can convince us that Merlin ought not to be
brought to light.... Well, you can't do any harm by talking, and you
may do some good. You may even accomplish your mission."

"He can't talk us out of it," Kurt Fawzi seemed determined to spoil
things by saying. "Conn, I'm coming around to Klem's way of thinking.
They just don't want anybody else to have it."

"No, we don't," Shanlee said. "We don't want the whole Federation
breaking up into bloody anarchy, and that's what'll happen if you dig
that thing up and put it into operation."

Nobody said anything except Fawzi, who began an indignant
contradiction and then subsided. Tom Brangwyn lit a cigarette.

"Would you mind letting me have one of those?" Shanlee said. "I
haven't had a smoke since I came here. It wouldn't have been in
character."

Brangwyn took one out of the pack, lit it at the tip of his own, and
gave it to Shanlee with his left hand, his right ready to strike.
Shanlee laughed in real amusement.

"Oh, Brother!" he reproved, in his former pious tones. "You distrust
your fellow man; that is a sin."

He rose slowly, the bathrobe flapping at his bare shins, and sat down
across the table from Conn.

"All right," he said. "I'll tell you about it. I'll tell you the
truth, which will be something of a novelty all around."

Shanlee puffed for a moment at the cigarette; it must really have
tasted good after his long abstinence.

"You know, we were really caught off balance when the War ended. It
even caught Merlin short; information lag, of course. The whole
Alliance caved in all at once. Well, we fed Merlin all the data
available, and analyzed the situation. Then we did something we really
weren't called upon to do, because that was policy-planning and wasn't
our province, but we were going to move an occupation army into System
States planets, and we didn't want to do anything that would embarrass
the Federation Government later. We fed Merlin every scrap of
available information on political and economic conditions everywhere
in the Federation, and set up a long-term computation of the general
effects of the War.

"The extrapolation was supposed to run five hundred years in the
future. It didn't. It stopped, at a point a trifle over two hundred
years from now, with a statement that no computation could be made
further because at that point the Terran Federation would no longer
exist."

The others, who had taken chairs facing him, looked at him blankly.

"No more Federation?" Judge Ledue asked incredulously. "Why, the
Federation, the Federation...."

The Federation would last forever. Anybody knew that. There just
couldn't be no more Federation.

"That's right," Shanlee said. "We had trouble believing it, too.
Remember, we were Federation officers. The Federation was our
religion. Just like patriotism used to be, back in the days of
nationalism. We checked for error. We made detail analyses. We ran it
all over again. It was no use.

"In two hundred years, there won't be any Terran Federation. The
Government will collapse, slowly. The Space Navy will disintegrate.
Planets and systems will lose touch with Terra and with one another.
You know what it was like here, just before the War? It will be like
that on every planet, even on Terra. Just a slow crumbling, till
everything is gone; then every planet will start sliding back, in
isolation, into barbarism."

"Merlin predicted that?" Kurt Fawzi asked, shocked.

If Merlin said so, it had to be true.

Shanlee nodded. "So we ran another computation; we added the data of
publication of this prognosis. You know, Merlin can't predict what you
or I would do under given circumstances, but Merlin can handle
large-group behavior with absolute accuracy. If we made public
Merlin's prognosis, the end would come, not in two centuries but in
less than one, and it wouldn't be a slow, peaceful decay; it would be
a bomb-type reaction. Rebellions. Overthrow of Federation authority,
and then revolt and counterrevolt against planetary authority.
Division along sectional or class lines on individual planets.
Interplanetary wars; what we fought the Alliance to prevent. Left in
ignorance of the future, people would go on trying to make do with
what they had. But if they found out that the Federation was doomed,
everybody would be trying to snatch what they could, and end by
smashing everything. Left in ignorance, there might be a planet here
and there that would keep enough of the old civilization to serve, in
five or so centuries, as a nucleus for a new one. Informed in advance
of the doom of the Federation, they would all go down together in the
same bloody shambles, and there would be a Galactic night of barbarism
for no one knows how many thousand years."

"We don't want anything like that to happen!" Tom Brangwyn said, in a
frightened voice.

"Then pull everybody out of here and blow the place up, Merlin along
with it," Shanlee said.

"No! We'll not do that!" Fawzi shouted. "I'll shoot the man dead who
tries it!"

"Why didn't you people blow Merlin up?" Conn asked.

"We'd built it; we'd worked with it. It was part of us, and we were
part of it. We couldn't. Besides, there was a chance that it might
survive the Federation; when a new civilization arose, it would be
useful. We just sealed it. There were fewer than a hundred of us who
knew about it. We all took an oath of secrecy. We spent the rest of
our lives trying to suppress any mention of Merlin or the Merlin
Project. You have no idea how shocked both General Travis and I were
when you told us that the story was still current here on Poictesme.
And when we found that you'd been getting into the records of the
Third Force, I took the next ship I could, a miserable little
freighter, and when I landed and found out what was happening, I
contacted Murchison and scared the life out of him with stories about
a secessionist conspiracy. All this Armageddonist, Human Supremacy,
Merlin-is-the-Devil, stuff that's been going on was started by
Murchison. And he succeeded in scaring Vyckhoven with the
Cybernarchists, too."

"This computation on the future of the Federation is still in the
back-work file?" Conn asked.

Shanlee nodded. "We were criminally reckless; I can see that, now. Let
me beg, again, that you destroy the whole thing."

"We'll have to talk it over among ourselves," Judge Ledue said. "The
five of us, here, cannot presume to speak for everybody. We will, of
course, have to keep you confined; I hope you will understand that we
cannot accept your parole."

"Is there anything you want in the meantime?" Conn asked.

"I would like something to smoke, and some clothes," General Shanlee
said. "And a shave and a haircut."




XXI


All through the night, a shifting blaze of many-colored light rose and
dimmed the stars above the mesa. They stared in awe, marveling at the
energy that was pouring out of the converters into a tiny spot that
inched its way around the collapsium shielding. It must have been
visible for hundreds of miles; it was, for there was a new flood of
rumors circulating in Storisende and repeated and denied by the
newscasts, now running continuously. Merlin had been found. Merlin had
been blown up by Government troops. Merlin was being transported to
Storisende to be installed as arbiter of the Government. Merlin the
Monster was destroying the planet. Merlin the Devil was unchained.

Conn and Kurt Fawzi and Dolf Kellton and Judge Ledue and Tom Brangwyn
clustered together, talking in whispers. They had told nobody, yet, of
the interview with Shanlee.

"You think it would make all that trouble?" Kellton was asking
anxiously, hoping that the others would convince him that it wouldn't.

"Maybe we had better destroy it," Judge Ledue faltered. "You see what
it's done already; the whole planet's in anarchy. If we let this go
on...."

"We can't decide anything like that, just the five of us," Brangwyn
was insisting. "We'll have to get the others together and see what
they think. We have no right to make any decision like this for them."

"They're no more able to make the decision than we are," Conn said.

"But we've got to; they have a right to know...."

"If you decide to destroy Merlin, you'll have to decide to kill me,
first," Kurt Fawzi said, his voice deadly calm. "You won't do it while
I'm alive."

"But, Kurt," Ledue expostulated. "You know why these people here at
Storisende are rioting? It's because they've lost hope, because
they're afraid and desperate. The Terran Federation is something
everybody feels they have to have, for peace and order and welfare. If
people thought it was breaking up, they'd be desperate, too. They'd do
the same insane things these people here on this planet are doing.
General Shanlee was right. Don't destroy the hope that keeps them
sane."

"We don't need to do that," Kurt Fawzi argued. "We can use Merlin to
solve our own problems; we don't need to tell the whole Federation
what's going to happen in two hundred years."

"It would get out; it couldn't help getting out," Ledue said.

"Let's not try to decide it ourselves," Conn said. "Let's get Merlin
into operation, and run a computation on it."

"You mean, ask Merlin to tell us whether it ought to be destroyed or
not?" Ledue asked incredulously. "Let Merlin put itself on trial, and
sentence itself to destruction?"

"Merlin is a computer; computers deal only in facts. Computers are
machines; they have no sense of self-preservation. If Merlin ought to
be destroyed, Merlin will tell us so."

"You willing to leave it up to Merlin, Kurt?" Tom Brangwyn asked.

Fawzi gulped. "Yes. If Merlin says we ought to, we'll have to do it."

Toward noon, a telecast went out from Koshchei, on a dozen different
wave-lengths. Conn, half asleep in a chair in the commander-in-chief's
office, saw Simon Macquarte, the young mathematics professor from
Storisende College who had become one of the leaders of the colony,
appear in the screen. The next moment, he was fully awake, shocked by
Macquarte's words:

"This is not a threat; this is a solemn, even a prayerful, warning. We
do not want to use genocidal weapons of mass destruction against the
world of our birth. But whether we do or not rests solely with you.

"We came here with a dream of a better world, a world of happiness and
plenty for all. We have been working, on Koshchei, to build such a
world on Poictesme. Now you are smashing that dream. When it is gone,
we will have nothing to live for--except revenge. And we will take
that revenge, make no mistake.

"We have the weapons with which to take it. Remember, this was a
Federation naval base and naval arsenal during the War. Here the
Federation Navy built their super-missiles, the missiles which
devastated Ashmodai, and Belphegor, and Baphomet, and hundreds of
these weapons are here. We have them, ready for launching. Once they
are launched, with the robo-pilots set for targets on Poictesme, you
will have a hundred and sixty hours, at the most, to live.

"We will launch them immediately if there is another attack made upon
Force Command Duplicate HQ, or upon Interplanetary Building in
Storisende, or if Rodney Maxwell is killed, no matter by whom or under
what circumstances.

"We beg you, earnestly and prayerfully, not to force us to do this
dreadful thing. We speak to each one of you, for each one of you holds
the fate of the planet in his own hands."

The image faded from the screen. As it did, Conn was looking from one
to another of the people in the room with him. All were dumbfounded,
most of them frightened.

"They wouldn't do it, would they?" Lorenzo Menardes was asking. "Conn,
you know those people. They wouldn't really?"

"Don't depend on it, Lorenzo," Klem Zareff said. "It's hard for a lot
of people to shoot somebody ten feet away with a pistol. But just
sending off a missile; that's nothing but setting a lot of dials and
then pushing a button."

"I'm not worrying about whether they'd do it or not," Conn said. "What
I'm worrying about is how many people will believe they will."

Apparently a good many people did. Zareff's combat vehicles began
reporting a cessation of fighting. The newscasts, repeating the
ultimatum from Koshchei, told of fewer and fewer disorders in the city
or elsewhere; by midafternoon, the rioting had stopped.

By that time, too, Rodney Maxwell was on-screen. He was, Conn noticed,
wearing his pistols again.

"What happened?" he asked. "They let you out on bail?"

Maxwell shook his head. "Charges dismissed; they didn't have anything
to charge me with in the first place. But they haven't let me out
yet."

"You're wearing your guns."

"Yes, but they still have me penned up here at the Executive Palace;
they're practically keeping me in the safe. I wish our people on
Koshchei hadn't mentioned me in their ultimatum; Jake Vyckhoven's
afraid to let me run around loose for fear some lunatic shoots me and
starts the planetbusters coming in. Jake did one good thing, though.
He ordered the Stock Exchange closed, and declared a five-day bank
holiday. By that time, you ought to have Merlin opened and working,
and then the market'll be safe."

Conn simply replied, "I hope so." There was no telling what kind of
taps there might be on the screen his father was using; he couldn't
risk telling him about Shanlee, or about the last computation which
Merlin had made. "If we send the _Lester Dawes_ in, do you think you
might talk them into letting you come out here?"

"I can try."

Flora arrived at Force Command that afternoon.

"I would have come sooner," she said, "but Mother's had a complete
collapse. It happened last evening; she's in the hospital. I was with
her until just an hour and a half ago. She's still unconscious."

"You mean she's in danger?"

"I don't know. They think she's all right, except for the shock. It
was the Travis statement that did it."

"Think I ought to go to her?"

Flora shook her head. "Just keep on with what you're doing here. There
isn't anything you can do for her now."

"The best thing you can do for her, Conn, is prove that you weren't
lying about Merlin," Sylvie told him.

The _Lester Dawes_ didn't make it from Force Command to Storisende and
back until after dark, and the green and white and red and orange
lights were rising in folds and waves. Rodney Maxwell had heard about
his wife's condition; it was the first thing he spoke of when Conn
and Flora and Sylvie met him as he got off the ship.

"There isn't anything we can do, Father," Flora said. "They'll call us
when there's any change."

He said the same thing Sylvie had said. "The only thing we can do is
get that infernal thing uncovered. Once we do this, everything'll be
all right. We'll show your mother that it isn't a fake and it isn't
anything dangerous; we'll put a stop to all these horror-stories about
mechanical devils and living machines...."

Conn drew his father off where the girls couldn't overhear.

"This is something worse," he said. "This is a bomb that could blow up
the whole Federation."

"Are you going nuts, too?" his father demanded.

Conn told him about Shanlee; he repeated, almost word for word, the
story Shanlee had told.

"Do you believe that?" his father asked.

"Don't you? You were in Storisende when the Travis statement came out;
you saw how people acted. If this story gets out, people will be
acting the same way on every planet in the Federation. Not just places
like Poictesme; planets like Terra and Baldur and Marduk and Odin and
Osiris. It would be the end of everything civilized, everywhere."

"Why didn't they use Merlin to save the Federation?"

"It's past saving. It's been past saving since before the War. The War
was what gave it the final shove. If they could have used Merlin to
reverse the process, they wouldn't have sealed it away."

"But you know, Conn, we can't destroy Merlin. If we did, the same
people who went crazy over the Travis statement would go crazy all
over again, worse than ever. We'd be destroying everything we planned
for, and we'd be destroying ourselves. That bluff young Macquarte and
Luther Chen-Wong and Bill Nichols made wouldn't work twice. And if
they weren't bluffing...."

His father shuddered.

"And if we don't, how long do you think civilization will last here,
if it blows up all over the rest of the Federation?"

The big machine cut on, a little spot of raw energy grinding away the
collapsium, inch by inch; the undulating curtains of colored light
illuminated the Badlands for miles around. Then, when the first hint
of dawn came into the east, they went out. The steady roar of the
generators that had battered every ear for over twenty-four hours
stopped. There was unbelieving silence, and then shouts.

The workmen swarmed out to man lifters. Slowly the heavy
apparatus--the reactor and the converters, the cutting machine, and
the shielding around it--was lifted away. Finally, a lone lifter came
in and men in radiation-suits went down to hook on grapples, and it
lifted away, carrying with it a ten-foot-square sheet of thin steel
that weighed almost thirty tons.

When they had battered a hole in the vitrified rock underneath, guards
brought up General Shanlee. Somebody almost up to professional
standards had given him a haircut; the beard was gone, too. A
Federation Army officer's uniform had been found reasonably close to
his size, and somebody had even provided him with the four stars of
his retirement rank. He was, again, the man Conn had seen in the
dome-house on Luna.

"Well, you got it open," he said, climbing down from the airjeep that
had brought him. "Now, what are you going to do with it?"

"We can't make up our minds," Conn said. "We're going to let the
computer tell us what to do with it."

Shanlee looked at him, startled. "You mean, you're going to have
Merlin judge itself and decide its own fate?" he asked. "You'll get
the same result we did."

They let a ladder down the hole and descended--Conn and his father,
Kurt Fawzi, Jerry Rivas, then Shanlee and his two guards, then
others--until a score of them were crowded in the room at the bottom,
their flashlights illuminating the circular chamber, revealing
ceiling-high metal cabinets, banks of button- and dial-studded control
panels, big keyboards. It was Shanlee who found the lights and put
them on.

"Powered from the central plant, down below," he said. "The main
cables are disguised as the grounding-outlet. If this thing had been
on when you put on the power, you'd have had an awful lot of power
going nowhere, apparently."

Rodney Maxwell was disappointed. "I know this stuff looks awfully
complex, but I'd have expected there to be more of it."

"Oh, I didn't get a chance to tell you about that. This is only the
operating end," Conn said, and then asked Shanlee if there were
inspection-screens. When Shanlee indicated them, he began putting them
on. "This is the real computer."

They all gave the same view, with minor differences--long corridors,
ten feet wide, between solid banks of steel cabinets on either side.
Conn explained where they were, and added:

"Kurt and the rest of them were sitting here, all this time, wondering
where Merlin was; it was all around them."

"Well, how did you get up here?" Fawzi asked. "We couldn't find
anything from below."

"No, you couldn't." Shanlee was amused. "Watch this."

It was so simple that nobody had ever guessed it. Below, back of the
Commander-in-chief's office, there was a closet, fifteen feet by
twenty. They had found it empty except for some bits of discarded
office-gear, and had used it as a catch-all for everything they wanted
out of the way. Shanlee went to where four thick steel columns rose
from floor to ceiling in a rectangle around a heavy-duty lifter,
pressing a button on a control-box on one of them. The lifter, and the
floor under it, rose, with a thick mass of vitrified rock underneath.
The closet, full of the junk that had been thrown into it, followed.

"That's it," he said. "We just tore out the controls inside that and
patched it up a little. There's a sheet of collapsium-plate under the
floor. Your scanners simply couldn't detect anything from below."

Confident that Merlin would decree its own destruction, Shanlee gave
his parole; the others accepted it. The newsmen were admitted to the
circular operating room and encouraged to send out views and
descriptions of everything. Then the lift controls were reinstalled,
the lid was put back on top, and the only access to the room was
through the office below. The entrance to this was always guarded by
Zarel's soldiers or Brangwyn's police.

There were only a score of them who could be let in on the actual
facts. For the most part, they were the same men who had been in
Fawzi's office on the afternoon of Conn's return, a year and a half
ago. A few others--Anse Dawes, Jerry Rivas, and five computermen Conn
had trained on Koshchei--had to be trusted. Conn insisted on letting
Sylvie Jacquemont in on the revised Awful Truth About Merlin. They
spent a lot of their time together, in Travis's office, for the most
part sunk in dejection.

They had finally found Merlin; now they must lose it. They were trying
to reconcile themselves and take comfort from the achievement, empty
as it was. They could see no way out. If Merlin said that Merlin had
to be destroyed, that was it. Merlin was infallible. Conn hated the
thought of destroying that machine with his whole being, not because
it was an infallible oracle, but because it was the climactic
masterpiece of the science he had spent years studying. To destroy it
was an even worse sacrilege to him than it was to the Merlinolators.
And Rodney Maxwell was thinking of the public effects. What the Travis
statement had started would be nothing by comparison.

"You know, we can keep the destruction of Merlin a secret," Conn said.
"It'll take some work down at the power plant, but we can overload all
the circuits and burn everything out at once." He turned to Shanlee.
"I don't know why you people didn't think of that."

Shanlee looked at him in surprise. "Why, now that you mention it,
neither do I," he admitted. "We just didn't."

"Then," Conn continued, "we can tinker up something in the operating
room that'll turn out what will look like computation results. As far
as anybody outside ourselves will know, Merlin will still be solving
everybody's problems. We'll do like any fortuneteller; tell the
customer what he wants to believe and keep him happy."

More lies; lies without end. And now he'd have a machine to do his
lying for him, a dummy computer that wouldn't compute anything. And
all he'd wanted, to begin with, had been a ship to haul some brandy to
where they could get a fair price for it.

Peace had returned. At first, it had been a frightened and uneasy
peace. The bluff--he hoped that was what it had been--by the Koshchei
colonists had shocked everybody into momentary inaction. In the
twenty-four hours that had followed, the forces of sanity and order
had gotten control again. Merlin existed and had been found. As for
Travis's statement, the old general had been bound by a wartime oath
of secrecy to deny Merlin's existence. The majority relaxed, ashamed
of their hysterical reaction. As for the Cybernarchists and
Armageddonists and Human Supremacy Leaguers, government and private
police, vastly augmented by volunteers, speedily rounded up the
leaders; their followers dispersed, realizing that Merlin was nothing
but a lot of dials and buttons, and interestedly watching the
broadcast views of it.

The banks were still closed, but discreet back-door withdrawals were
permitted to keep business going; so was the Stock Exchange, but word
was going around the brokerage offices that Trisystem Investments was
in the market for a long list of securities. Nobody was willing to do
anything that might upset the precarious balance; everybody was
talking about the bright future, when Merlin would guide Poictesme to
ever greater and more splendid prosperity.

Conn's father and sister flew to Litchfield; Flora stayed with her
mother, and Rodney Maxwell returned to Force Command, shaking his head
gravely.

"She's still unconscious, Conn," he said. "She just lies there, barely
breathing. The doctors don't know.... I wish Wade hadn't gone on the
ship."

The price of what he had wanted to do was becoming unendurably high
for Conn.

They ran off the computations Merlin had made forty years before, and
rechecked them. There had been no error. The Terran Federation,
overextended, had been cracking for a century before the War; the
strain of that conflict had started an irreversible breakup. Two
centuries for the Federation as such; at most, another century of
irregular trade and occasional war between independent planets, Galaxy
full of human-populated planets as poor as Poictesme at its worst. Or,
aware of the future, sudden outbursts of desperate violence, then
anarchy and barbarism.

It took a long time to set up the new computation. Forty years
of history for almost five hundred planets had to be abstracted
and summarized and translated from verbal symbols to the
electro-mathematical language of computers and fed in. Conn and Sylvie
and General Shanlee and the three men and two women Conn had taught on
Koshchei worked and rested briefly and worked again. Finally, it was
finished.

"General; you're the oldest Merlin hand," Conn said, gesturing to the
red button at the main control panel, "You do it."

"You do it, Conn. None of us would be here except for you."

"Thank you, General."

He pressed the button. They all stood silently watching the output
slot.

Even a positronic computer does not work instantaneously. Nothing
does. Conn took his eyes from the slot from which the tape would come,
and watched the second-hand of the clock above it. The wait didn't
seem like hours to him; it only seemed like seventy-five seconds, that
way. Then the bell rang, and the tape began coming out.

It took another hour and a half of button-punching; the Braille-like
symbols on the tape had to be retranslated, and even Merlin couldn't
do that for itself. Merlin didn't think in human terms.

It was the same as before. In ignorance, the peoples of the Federation
worlds would go on, striving to keep things running until they wore
out, and then sinking into apathetic acceptance. Deprived of hope,
they would turn to frantic violence and smash everything they most
wanted to preserve. Conn pushed another button.

The second information-request went in: _What is the best course to be
followed under these conditions by the people of Poictesme?_ It had
taken some time to phrase that in symbols a computer would find
comprehensible; the answer, at great length, emerged in two minutes
eight seconds. Retranslating it took five hours.

In the beginning and for the first ten years, it was, almost item for
item, the Maxwell Plan. Export trade, specialized in luxury goods.
Brandies and wines, tobacco; a long list of other exportable
commodities, and optimum markets. Reopening of industrial plants;
establishment of new industries. Attainment of economic
self-sufficiency. Cultural self-sufficiency; establishment of
universities, institutes of technology, research laboratories. Then
the Maxwell Plan became the Merlin Plan; the breakup of the Federation
was a fact that entered into the computation. Build-up of military
strength to resist aggression by other planetary governments. Defense
of the Gartner Trisystem. Lists of possible aggressor planets. Revival
of interstellar communications and trade; expeditions, conquest and
re-education of natives....

"We can't begin to handle this without Merlin," Conn said. "If that
means blowing up the Federation, let it blow. We'll start a new one
here."

"No; if there's a general, violent collapse of the Federation, it'll
spread to Poictesme," Shanlee told him. "Let's ask Merlin the big
question."

Merlin took a good five minutes to work that one out. The question had
to include a full description of Merlin, and a statement of the
information which must be kept secret. The answer was even more
lengthy, but it was summed up in the first word: _Falsification_.

"So Merlin's got to be a liar, too, along with the rest of us!" Sylvie
cried. "Conn, you've corrupted his morals!"

The rest of it was false data which must be taped in, and lists of
corrections which must be made in evaluating any computation into
which such data might enter. There was also a statement that, after
fifty years, suppression of the truth and circulation of falsely
optimistic statements about the Federation would no longer have any
importance.

"Well, that's it," Conn said. "Merlin thought himself out of a death
sentence."

They crowded into the lift and went down to the office below.
Everybody who knew what had been going on upstairs was there. Most of
them were nursing drinks; almost everybody was smoking. All of them
were silent, until Judge Ledue took his cigar from his mouth.

"Has the jury reached a verdict?" he asked, clinging with courtroom
formality to his self-control.

"Yes, your Honor. We find the defendant, Merlin, not guilty as
charged."

In the uproar his words released, Rodney Maxwell got to his feet and
came quickly to Conn.

"Flora called just a while ago. Your mother is conscious; she's asking
for us. Flora says she seems perfectly normal."

"We'll go right away; take a recon-car. General, will you explain
things till I get back? Sylvie, do you want to come with us?"




XXII


It was autumn again, the second autumn since he had landed from the
_City of Asgard_ at Storisende and taken the _Countess Dorothy_ home
to Litchfield. Again the fields were bare and brown; all up and down
the Gordon Valley the melons were harvested, and the wine-pressing was
ready to start.

The house was crowded today. All top-level Litchfield seemed to have
turned out, and there were guests from Storisende, and even a few who
had made the trip from Koshchei to be there, Simon Macquarte, the
president of Koshchei Tech; Conn would always remember him in the
screen threatening a whole planet with devastation. Luther Chen-Wong,
the chief executive of Koshchei Colony. Clyde Nichols, the president
of Koshchei Airlines.

He almost bumped into Yves Jacquemont, coming in from the hall.
Jacquemont's beard had been trimmed down to a small imperial, and he
was wearing the uniform of Trisystem & Interstellar Spacelines,
nothing at all like a Federation Space Navy uniform. He was laughing
about something; he threw an arm over Conn's shoulder, and they went
into the front parlor together.

"Oh, Gehenna of a big crop!" he heard Klem Zareff's voice, chuckling
happily, above the babble in the room. "You wouldn't believe it. Why,
we had to build six new vats...."

The thin-faced, white-haired man in the chair beside him said
something. Mike Shanlee and Klem Zareff, old enemies, were now fast
friends. Shanlee had come in from Force Command with Conn that
morning. He had stayed on Poictesme as nominal head of Project Merlin,
and intended to remain there for the rest of his life.

"Oh, there aren't any more farm-tramps," Zareff replied. "Everybody's
getting factory jobs off-planet. I have an awful time getting help,
and what I can get won't work for less than ten sols a day. Why,
they're even organizing a union...."

There were feminine shrieks from across the room, and a stampede. The
housecleaning-robot had come in, running its vacuum-cleaning hose
around and brandishing its mops. He saw his mother break away from a
group of older ladies and shout:

"_Oscar!_"

The robot stopped dead. "Yash'm?" a voice came out of it,
Sheshan-accented.

"Go out!" his mother commanded. "Go to kitchen. Stay there."

"Yash'm." The robot floated out the door to the hall.

His mother rejoined her friends. Probably telling them, for the
thousandth time, that her boy Conn fixed up the sound receptors and
voice for Oscar. Or harping on how Conn had been telling everybody the
truth, all along, and people wouldn't believe him.

Sylvie came up to him and caught his arm. "Come on, Conn; they're
going to start the rehearsal," she said.

"They've been going to start it for an hour," her father told her.

"Well, they're really going to start it now."

"All right. You two run along," Yves Jacquemont said. "And you'd
better start rehearsing for your own wedding before long. The _Genji_
will be ready to hyper out in another month, and I don't want to be at
space when my only daughter gets married."

They pushed through the crowd, dragging Conn's mother with them toward
the big living room beyond. On the way, Mrs. Maxwell stopped to try to
drag Judge Ledue out of a chair.

"Judge, the rehearsal is starting; they can't do it without you."

Ledue clung to his chair. "They daren't do it with me, Mrs. Maxwell.
If I get into it, it won't be a rehearsal; they'll be really married,
and then there won't be any point in having a wedding tomorrow."

"Oh, Morgan!" Conn called across the room to Gatworth. "You've just
been appointed temporary judge for the wedding rehearsal!"

There was a big crowd around Wade Lucas, in the next room; he was
telling them about the voyage to Baldur, from which he had returned,
and the one to Irminsul, with a cargo of arms, machine tools and
contragravity vehicles, on which he and his bride would go for their
honeymoon. There was another crowd around Flora; she was telling them
about the new fashions on Baldur, which had been brought back on the
_Ouroboros II_.

"Where's your father?" his mother was asking him. "He has to rehearse
giving the bride away."

"Probably in his office. I'll go get him."

"You'll get into an argument with somebody and forget to come back,"
his mother said. "Sylvie, you go with him, and bring both of them
back."

"When'll we have our wedding, Sylvie?" he asked as they went off
together.

"Well, before Dad goes to Aditya with the _Genji_. That'll have to be
in a month."

"Two weeks? That ought to be plenty of time to get ready, and let
people recover from this one."

"Everybody's here now. Let's make it a double wedding tomorrow," she
suggested.

He hadn't been prepared for that. "Well, I hadn't expected.... Sure!
Good idea!" he agreed.

There was a crowd in Rodney Maxwell's little office--Fawzi and some
others, and some Storisende people. One of the latter was
vociferating:

"Jake Vyckhoven's no good, and he never was any good!"

"Well, you have to admit, if he hadn't ordered the banks and the Stock
Exchange closed that time, we'd have had a horrible panic--"

"Admit nothing of the kind! Jethro, you were there, you'll bear me
out. About a dozen of us were at Executive Palace for hours, bullying
him into that. Why, we almost had to twist one of his arms while he
was signing the order with the other. And now he has the gall to run
for re-election on the strength of his heroic actions at the time of
the Travis Hoax!"

"I know who we want for President!" another Storisende man exclaimed.
"He's right here in this room!"

"Yes!" Rodney Maxwell almost bellowed, before the other man could say
anything else. "Here he is!" He grabbed Kurt Fawzi by the arm and
yanked him to his feet. "Here's the man most responsible for finding
Merlin; the man who first suggested sending my son Conn to Terra to
school, the man who, more than anyone else, devoted his life to the
search for Merlin, the man whose inextinguishable faith and
indomitable courage kept that search alive through its darkest hours.
Everybody, get a drink; a toast to our next President, Kurt Fawzi!"

Conn was sure he heard his father add: "Ghu, what a narrow escape!"

Then he and Sylvie began chanting, in unison, "_We want Fawzi! We want
Fawzi!_"

_BOOKEND_


Blinded by the bomb-flash and numbed by the narcotic injection, he could
not estimate the extent of his injuries, but he knew that he was dying.
Around him, in the darkness, voices sounded as through a thick wall.

"They mighta left mosta these Joes where they was. Half of them won't
even last till the truck comes."

"No matter; so long as they're alive, they must be treated," another
voice, crisp and cultivated, rebuked. "Better start taking names, while
we're waiting."

"Yes, sir." Fingers fumbled at his identity badge. "Hartley, Allan;
Captain, G5, Chem. Research AN/73/D. Serial, SO-23869403J."

"Allan Hartley!" The medic officer spoke in shocked surprise. "Why, he's
the man who wrote 'Children of the Mist', 'Rose of Death', and
'Conqueror's Road'!"

He tried to speak, and must have stirred; the corpsman's voice
sharpened.

"Major, I think he's part conscious. Mebbe I better give him 'nother
shot."

"Yes, yes; by all means, sergeant."

Something jabbed Allan Hartley in the back of the neck. Soft billows of
oblivion closed in upon him, and all that remained to him was a tiny
spark of awareness, glowing alone and lost in a great darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Spark grew brighter. He was more than a something that merely knew
that it existed. He was a man, and he had a name, and a military rank,
and memories. Memories of the searing blue-green flash, and of what he
had been doing outside the shelter the moment before, and memories of
the month-long siege, and of the retreat from the north, and memories of
the days before the War, back to the time when he had been little Allan
Hartley, a schoolboy, the son of a successful lawyer, in Williamsport,
Pennsylvania.

His mother he could not remember; there was only a vague impression of
the house full of people who had tried to comfort him for something he
could not understand. But he remembered the old German woman who had
kept house for his father, afterward, and he remembered his bedroom,
with its chintz-covered chairs, and the warm-colored patch quilt on the
old cherry bed, and the tan curtains at the windows, edged with dusky
red, and the morning sun shining through them. He could almost see them,
now.

He blinked. He _could_ see them!

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long time, he lay staring at them unbelievingly, and then he
deliberately closed his eyes and counted ten seconds, and as he counted,
terror gripped him. He was afraid to open them again, lest he find
himself blind, or gazing at the filth and wreckage of a blasted city,
but when he reached ten, he forced himself to look, and gave a sigh of
relief. The sunlit curtains and the sun-gilded mist outside were still
there.

He reached out to check one sense against another, feeling the rough
monk's cloth and the edging of maroon silk thread. They were tangible as
well as visible. Then he saw that the back of his hand was unscarred.
There should have been a scar, souvenir of a rough-and-tumble brawl of
his cub reporter days. He examined both hands closely. An instant later,
he had sat up in bed and thrown off the covers, partially removing his
pajamas and inspecting as much of his body as was visible.

It was the smooth body of a little boy.

That was ridiculous. He was a man of forty-three; an army officer, a
chemist, once a best-selling novelist. He had been married, and divorced
ten years ago. He looked again at his body. It was only twelve years
old. Fourteen, at the very oldest. His eyes swept the room, wide with
wonder. Every detail was familiar: the flower-splashed chair covers; the
table that served as desk and catch-all for his possessions; the
dresser, with its mirror stuck full of pictures of aircraft. It was the
bedroom of his childhood home. He swung his legs over the edge of the
bed. They were six inches too short to reach the floor.

For an instant, the room spun dizzily; and he was in the grip of utter
panic, all confidence in the evidence of his senses lost. Was he insane?
Or delirious? Or had the bomb really killed him; was this what death was
like? What was that thing, about "ye become as little children"? He
started to laugh, and his juvenile larynx made giggling sounds. They
seemed funny, too, and aggravated his mirth. For a little while, he was
on the edge of hysteria and then, when he managed to control his
laughter, he felt calmer. If he were dead, then he must be a discarnate
entity, and would be able to penetrate matter. To his relief, he was
unable to push his hand through the bed. So he was alive; he was also
fully awake, and, he hoped, rational. He rose to his feet and prowled
about the room, taking stock of its contents.

There was no calendar in sight, and he could find no newspapers or dated
periodicals, but he knew that it was prior to July 18, 1946. On that
day, his fourteenth birthday, his father had given him a light .22
rifle, and it had been hung on a pair of rustic forks on the wall. It
was not there now, nor ever had been. On the table, he saw a boys' book
of military aircraft, with a clean, new dustjacket; the flyleaf was
inscribed: _To Allan Hartley, from his father, on his thirteenth
birthday, 7/18 '45._ Glancing out the window at the foliage on the
trees, he estimated the date at late July or early August, 1945; that
would make him just thirteen.

His clothes were draped on a chair beside the bed. Stripping off his
pajamas, he donned shorts, then sat down and picked up a pair of
lemon-colored socks, which he regarded with disfavor. As he pulled one
on, a church bell began to clang. St. Boniface, up on the hill, ringing
for early Mass; so this was Sunday. He paused, the second sock in his
hand.

There was no question that his present environment was actual. Yet, on
the other hand, he possessed a set of memories completely at variance
with it. Now, suppose, since his environment were not an illusion,
everything else were? Suppose all these troublesome memories were no
more than a dream? Why, he was just little Allan Hartley, safe in his
room on a Sunday morning, badly scared by a nightmare! Too much science
fiction, Allan; too many comic books!

That was a wonderfully comforting thought, and he hugged it to him
contentedly. It lasted all the while he was buttoning up his shirt and
pulling on his pants, but when he reached for his shoes, it evaporated.
Ever since he had wakened, he realized, he had been occupied with
thoughts utterly incomprehensible to any thirteen-year-old; even
thinking in words that would have been so much Sanscrit to himself at
thirteen. He shook his head regretfully. The just-a-dream hypothesis
went by the deep six.

He picked up the second shoe and glared at it as though it were
responsible for his predicament. He was going to have to be careful. An
unexpected display of adult characteristics might give rise to some
questions he would find hard to answer credibly. Fortunately, he was an
only child; there would be no brothers or sisters to trip him up. Old
Mrs. Stauber, the housekeeper, wouldn't be much of a problem; even in
his normal childhood, he had bulked like an intellectual giant in
comparison to her. But his father--

Now, there the going would be tough. He knew that shrewd attorney's
mind, whetted keen on a generation of lying and reluctant witnesses.
Sooner or later, he would forget for an instant and betray himself. Then
he smiled, remembering the books he had discovered, in his late 'teens,
on his father's shelves and recalling the character of the openminded
agnostic lawyer. If he could only avoid the inevitable unmasking until
he had a plausible explanatory theory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Blake Hartley was leaving the bathroom as Allan Hartley opened his door
and stepped into the hall. The lawyer was bare-armed and in slippers; at
forty-eight, there was only a faint powdering of gray in his dark hair,
and not a gray thread in his clipped mustache. The old Merry Widower,
himself, Allan thought, grinning as he remembered the white-haired but
still vigorous man from whom he'd parted at the outbreak of the War.

"'Morning, Dad," he greeted.

"'Morning, son. You're up early. Going to Sunday school?"

Now there was the advantage of a father who'd cut his first intellectual
tooth on Tom Paine and Bob Ingersoll; attendance at divine services was
on a strictly voluntary basis.

"Why, I don't think so; I want to do some reading, this morning."

"That's always a good thing to do," Blake Hartley approved. "After
breakfast, suppose you take a walk down to the station and get me a
_Times_." He dug in his trouser pocket and came out with a half dollar.
"Get anything you want for yourself, while you're at it."

Allan thanked his father and pocketed the coin.

"Mrs. Stauber'll still be at Mass," he suggested. "Say I get the paper
now; breakfast won't be ready till she gets here."

"Good idea." Blake Hartley nodded, pleased. "You'll have three-quarters
of an hour, at least."

       *       *       *       *       *

So far, he congratulated himself, everything had gone smoothly.
Finishing his toilet, he went downstairs and onto the street, turning
left at Brandon to Campbell, and left again in the direction of the
station. Before he reached the underpass, a dozen half-forgotten
memories had revived. Here was a house that would, in a few years, be
gutted by fire. Here were four dwellings standing where he had last seen
a five-story apartment building. A gasoline station and a weed-grown lot
would shortly be replaced by a supermarket. The environs of the station
itself were a complete puzzle to him, until he oriented himself.

He bought a New York _Times_, glancing first of all at the date line.
Sunday, August 5, 1945; he'd estimated pretty closely. The battle of
Okinawa had been won. The Potsdam Conference had just ended. There were
still pictures of the B-25 crash against the Empire State Building, a
week ago Saturday. And Japan was still being pounded by bombs from the
air and shells from off-shore naval guns. Why, tomorrow, Hiroshima was
due for the Big Job! It amused him to reflect that he was probably the
only person in Williamsport who knew that.

On the way home, a boy, sitting on the top step of a front porch, hailed
him. Allan replied cordially, trying to remember who it was. Of course;
Larry Morton! He and Allan had been buddies. They probably had been
swimming, or playing Commandos and Germans, the afternoon before. Larry
had gone to Cornell the same year that Allan had gone to Penn State;
they had both graduated in 1954. Larry had gotten into some Government
bureau, and then he had married a Pittsburgh girl, and had become
twelfth vice-president of her father's firm. He had been killed, in
1968, in a plane crash.

"You gonna Sunday school?" Larry asked, mercifully unaware of the fate
Allan foresaw for him.

"Why, no. I have some things I want to do at home." He'd have to watch
himself. Larry would spot a difference quicker than any adult. "Heck
with it," he added.

"Golly, I wisht I c'ld stay home from Sunday school whenever I wanted
to," Larry envied. "How about us goin' swimmin', at the Canoe Club,
'safter?"

Allan thought fast. "Gee, I wisht I c'ld," he replied, lowering his
grammatical sights. "I gotta stay home, 'safter. We're expectin'
comp'ny; coupla aunts of mine. Dad wants me to stay home when they
come."

That went over all right. Anybody knew that there was no rational
accounting for the vagaries of the adult mind, and no appeal from adult
demands. The prospect of company at the Hartley home would keep Larry
away, that afternoon. He showed his disappointment.

"Aw, jeepers creepers!" he blasphemed euphemistically.

"Mebbe t'morrow," Allan said. "If I c'n make it. I gotta go, now; ain't
had breakfast yet." He scuffed his feet boyishly, exchanged so-longs
with his friend, and continued homeward.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he had hoped, the Sunday paper kept his father occupied at breakfast,
to the exclusion of any dangerous table talk. Blake Hartley was still
deep in the financial section when Allan left the table and went to the
library. There should be two books there to which he wanted badly to
refer. For a while, he was afraid that his father had not acquired them
prior to 1945, but he finally found them, and carried them onto the
front porch, along with a pencil and a ruled yellow scratch pad. In his
experienced future--or his past-to-come--Allan Hartley had been
accustomed to doing his thinking with a pencil. As reporter, as novelist
plotting his work, as amateur chemist in his home laboratory, as
scientific warfare research officer, his ideas had always been clarified
by making notes. He pushed a chair to the table and built up the seat
with cushions, wondering how soon he would become used to the
proportional disparity between himself and the furniture. As he opened
the books and took his pencil in his hand, there was one thing missing.
If he could only smoke a pipe, now!

His father came out and stretched in a wicker chair with the _Times_
book-review section. The morning hours passed. Allan Hartley leafed
through one book and then the other. His pencil moved rapidly at times;
at others, he doodled absently. There was no question, any more, in his
mind, as to what or who he was. He was Allan Hartley, a man of
forty-three, marooned in his own thirteen-year-old body, thirty years
back in his own past. That was, of course, against all common sense, but
he was easily able to ignore that objection. It had been made before:
against the astronomy of Copernicus, and the geography of Columbus, and
the biology of Darwin, and the industrial technology of Samuel Colt, and
the military doctrines of Charles de Gaulle. Today's common sense had a
habit of turning into tomorrow's utter nonsense. What he needed, right
now, but bad, was a theory that would explain what had happened to him.

Understanding was beginning to dawn when Mrs. Stauber came out to
announce midday dinner.

"I hope you von't mind haffin' it so early," she apologized. "Mein
sister, Jennie, offer in Nippenose, she iss sick; I vant to go see her,
dis afternoon, yet. I'll be back in blenty time to get supper, Mr.
Hartley."

"Hey, Dad!" Allan spoke up. "Why can't we get our own supper, and have a
picnic, like? That'd be fun, and Mrs. Stauber could stay as long as she
wanted to."

His father looked at him. Such consideration for others was a most
gratifying deviation from the juvenile norm; dawn of altruism, or
something. He gave hearty assent:

"Why, of course, Mrs. Stauber. Allan and I can shift for ourselves, this
evening; can't we, Allan? You needn't come back till tomorrow morning."

"_Ach_, t'ank you! T'ank you so mooch, Mr. Hartley."

At dinner, Allan got out from under the burden of conversation by
questioning his father about the War and luring him into a lengthy
dissertation on the difficulties of the forthcoming invasion of Japan.
In view of what he remembered of the next twenty-four hours, Allan was
secretly amused. His father was sure that the War would run on to
mid-1946.

After dinner, they returned to the porch, Hartley _père_ smoking a cigar
and carrying out several law books. He only glanced at these
occasionally; for the most part, he sat and blew smoke rings, and
watched them float away. Some thrice-guilty felon was about to be
triumphantly acquitted by a weeping jury; Allan could recognize a
courtroom masterpiece in the process of incubation.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was several hours later that the crunch of feet on the walk caused
father and son to look up simultaneously. The approaching visitor was a
tall man in a rumpled black suit; he had knobby wrists and big, awkward
hands; black hair flecked with gray, and a harsh, bigoted face. Allan
remembered him. Frank Gutchall. Lived on Campbell Street; a religious
fanatic, and some sort of lay preacher. Maybe he needed legal advice;
Allan could vaguely remember some incident--

"Ah, good afternoon, Mr. Gutchall. Lovely day, isn't it?" Blake Hartley
said.

Gutchall cleared his throat. "Mr. Hartley, I wonder if you could lend me
a gun and some bullets," he began, embarrassedly. "My little dog's been
hurt, and it's suffering something terrible. I want a gun, to put the
poor thing out of its pain."

"Why, yes; of course. How would a 20-gauge shotgun do?" Blake Hartley
asked. "You wouldn't want anything heavy."

Gutchall fidgeted. "Why, er, I was hoping you'd let me have a little
gun." He held his hands about six inches apart. "A pistol, that I could
put in my pocket. It wouldn't look right, to carry a hunting gun on the
Lord's day; people wouldn't understand that it was for a work of mercy."

The lawyer nodded. In view of Gutchall's religious beliefs, the
objection made sense.

"Well, I have a Colt .38-special," he said, "but you know, I belong to
this Auxiliary Police outfit. If I were called out for duty, this
evening, I'd need it. How soon could you bring it back?"

Something clicked in Allan Hartley's mind. He remembered, now, what that
incident had been. He knew, too, what he had to do.

"Dad, aren't there some cartridges left for the Luger?" he asked.

Blake Hartley snapped his fingers. "By George, yes! I have a German
automatic I can let you have, but I wish you'd bring it back as soon as
possible. I'll get it for you."

Before he could rise, Allan was on his feet.

"Sit still, Dad; I'll get it. I know where the cartridges are." With
that, he darted into the house and upstairs.

The Luger hung on the wall over his father's bed. Getting it down, he
dismounted it, working with rapid precision. He used the blade of his
pocketknife to unlock the endpiece of the breechblock, slipping out the
firing pin and buttoning it into his shirt pocket. Then he reassembled
the harmless pistol, and filled the clip with 9-millimeter cartridges
from the bureau drawer.

There was an extension telephone beside the bed. Finding Gutchall's
address in the directory, he lifted the telephone, and stretched his
handkerchief over the mouthpiece. Then he dialed Police Headquarters.

[Illustration]

"This is Blake Hartley," he lied, deepening his voice and copying his
father's tone. "Frank Gutchall, who lives at...take this down"--he gave
Gutchall's address--"has just borrowed a pistol from me, ostensibly to
shoot a dog. He has no dog. He intends shooting his wife. Don't argue
about how I know; there isn't time. Just take it for granted that I do.
I disabled the pistol--took out the firing pin--but if he finds out what
I did, he may get some other weapon. He's on his way home, but he's on
foot. If you hurry, you may get a man there before he arrives, and grab
him before he finds out the pistol won't shoot."

"O. K., Mr. Hartley. We'll take care of it. Thanks."

"And I wish you'd get my pistol back, as soon as you can. It's something
I brought home from the other War, and I shouldn't like to lose it."

"We'll take care of that, too. Thank you, Mr. Hartley."

He hung up, and carried the Luger and the loaded clip down to the porch.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Look, Mr. Gutchall; here's how it works," he said, showing it to the
visitor. Then he slapped in the clip and yanked up on the toggle loading
the chamber. "It's ready to shoot, now; this is the safety." He pushed
it on. "When you're ready to shoot, just shove it forward and up, and
then pull the trigger. You have to pull the trigger each time; it's
loaded for eight shots. And be sure to put the safety back when you're
through shooting."

"Did you load the chamber?" Blake Hartley demanded.

"Sure. It's on safe, now."

"Let me see." His father took the pistol, being careful to keep his
finger out of the trigger guard, and looked at it. "Yes, that's all
right." He repeated the instructions Allan had given, stressing the
importance of putting the safety on after using. "Understand how it
works, now?" he asked.

"Yes, I understand how it works. Thank you, Mr. Hartley. Thank you, too,
young man."

Gutchall put the Luger in his hip pocket, made sure it wouldn't fall
out, and took his departure.

"You shouldn't have loaded it," Hartley _père_ reproved, when he was
gone.

Allan sighed. This was it; the masquerade was over.

"I had to, to keep you from fooling with it," he said. "I didn't want
you finding out that I'd taken out the firing pin."

"You what?"

"Gutchall didn't want that gun to shoot a dog. He has no dog. He meant
to shoot his wife with it. He's a religious maniac; sees visions, hears
voices, receives revelations, talks with the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost
probably put him up to this caper. I'll submit that any man who holds
long conversations with the Deity isn't to be trusted with a gun, and
neither is any man who lies about why he wants one. And while I was at
it, I called the police, on the upstairs phone. I had to use your name;
I deepened my voice and talked through a handkerchief."

"You--" Blake Hartley jumped as though bee-stung. "Why did you have to
do that?"

"You know why. I couldn't have told them, 'This is little Allan Hartley,
just thirteen years old; please, Mr. Policeman, go and arrest Frank
Gutchall before he goes root-toot-toot at his wife with my pappa's
Luger.' That would have gone over big, now, wouldn't it?"

"And suppose he really wants to shoot a dog; what sort of a mess will I
be in?"

"No mess at all. If I'm wrong--which I'm not--I'll take the thump for
it, myself. It'll pass for a dumb kid trick, and nothing'll be done. But
if I'm right, you'll have to front for me. They'll keep your name out of
it, but they'd give me a lot of cheap boy-hero publicity, which I don't
want." He picked up his pencil again. "We should have the complete
returns in about twenty minutes."

       *       *       *       *       *

That was a ten-minute under-estimate, and it was another quarter-hour
before the detective-sergeant who returned the Luger had finished
congratulating Blake Hartley and giving him the thanks of the
Department. After he had gone, the lawyer picked up the Luger, withdrew
the clip, and ejected the round in the chamber.

"Well," he told his son, "you were right. You saved that woman's life."
He looked at the automatic, and then handed it across the table. "Now,
let's see you put that firing pin back."

Allan Hartley dismantled the weapon, inserted the missing part, and put
it together again, then snapped it experimentally and returned it to his
father. Blake Hartley looked at it again, and laid it on the table.

"Now, son, suppose we have a little talk," he said softly.

"But I explained everything." Allan objected innocently.

"You did not," his father retorted. "Yesterday you'd never have thought
of a trick like this; why, you wouldn't even have known how to take this
pistol apart. And at dinner, I caught you using language and expressing
ideas that were entirely outside anything you'd ever known before. Now,
I want to know--and I mean this literally."

Allan chuckled. "I hope you're not toying with the rather medieval
notion of obsession," he said.

Blake Hartley started. Something very like that must have been flitting
through his mind. He opened his mouth to say something, then closed it
abruptly.

"The trouble is, I'm not sure you aren't right," his son continued. "You
say you find me--changed. When did you first notice a difference?"

"Last night, you were still my little boy. This morning--" Blake Hartley
was talking more to himself than to Allan. "I don't know. You were
unusually silent at breakfast. And come to think of it, there was
something ... something strange ... about you when I saw you in the
hall, upstairs.... Allan!" he burst out, vehemently. "What has happened
to you?"

Allan Hartley felt a twinge of pain. What his father was going through
was almost what he, himself, had endured, in the first few minutes after
waking.

"I wish I could be sure, myself, Dad," he said. "You see, when I woke,
this morning, I hadn't the least recollection of anything I'd done
yesterday. August 4, 1945, that is," he specified. "I was positively
convinced that I was a man of forty-three, and my last memory was of
lying on a stretcher, injured by a bomb explosion. And I was equally
convinced that this had happened in 1975."

"Huh?" His father straightened. "Did you say nineteen _seventy_-five?"
He thought for a moment. "That's right; in 1975, you will be
forty-three. A bomb, you say?"

Allan nodded. "During the siege of Buffalo, in the Third World War," he
said, "I was a captain in G5--Scientific Warfare, General Staff. There'd
been a transpolar air invasion of Canada, and I'd been sent to the front
to check on service failures of a new lubricating oil for combat
equipment. A week after I got there, Ottawa fell, and the retreat
started. We made a stand at Buffalo, and that was where I copped it. I
remember being picked up, and getting a narcotic injection. The next
thing I knew, I was in bed, upstairs, and it was 1945 again, and I was
back in my own little thirteen-year-old body."

"Oh, Allan, you just had a nightmare to end nightmares!" his father
assured him, laughing a trifle too heartily. "That's all!"

"That was one of the first things I thought of. I had to reject it; it
just wouldn't fit the facts. Look; a normal dream is part of the
dreamer's own physical brain, isn't it? Well, here is a part about two
thousand per cent greater than the whole from which it was taken. Which
is absurd."

"You mean all this Battle of Buffalo stuff? That's easy. All the radio
commentators have been harping on the horrors of World War III, and you
couldn't have avoided hearing some of it. You just have an undigested
chunk of H. V. Kaltenborn raising hell in your subconscious."

"It wasn't just World War III; it was everything. My four years at high
school, and my four years at Penn State, and my seven years as a
reporter on the Philadelphia Record. And my novels: '_Children of the
Mist_,' '_Rose of Death_,' '_Conqueror's Road_.' They were no kid stuff.
Why, yesterday I'd never even have thought of some of the ideas I used
in my detective stories, that I published under a _nom-de-plume_. And my
hobby, chemistry; I was pretty good at that. Patented a couple of
processes that made me as much money as my writing. You think a
thirteen-year-old just dreamed all that up? Or, here; you speak French,
don't you?" He switched languages and spoke at some length in good
conversational slang-spiced Parisian. "Too bad you don't speak Spanish,
too," he added, reverting to English. "Except for a Mexican accent you
could cut with a machete, I'm even better there than in French. And I
know some German, and a little Russian."

       *       *       *       *       *

Blake Hartley was staring at his son, stunned. It was some time before
he could make himself speak.

"I could barely keep up with you, in French," he admitted. "I can swear
that in the last thirteen years of your life, you had absolutely no
chance to learn it. All right; you lived till 1975, you say. Then, all
of a sudden, you found yourself back here, thirteen years old, in 1945.
I suppose you remember everything in between?" he asked. "Did you ever
read James Branch Cabell? Remember Florian de Puysange, in 'The High
Place'?"

"Yes. You find the same idea in 'Jurgen' too," Allan said. "You know,
I'm beginning to wonder if Cabell mightn't have known something he
didn't want to write."

"But it's impossible!" Blake Hartley hit the table with his hand, so
hard that the heavy pistol bounced. The loose round he had ejected from
the chamber toppled over and started to roll, falling off the edge. He
stooped and picked it up. "How can you go back, against time? And the
time you claim you came from doesn't exist, now; it hasn't happened
yet." He reached for the pistol magazine, to insert the cartridge, and
as he did, he saw the books in front of his son. "Dunne's 'Experiment
with Time,'" he commented. "And J. N. M. Tyrrell's 'Science and
Psychical Phenomena.' Are you trying to work out a theory?"

"Yes." It encouraged Allan to see that his father had unconsciously
adopted an adult-to-adult manner. "I think I'm getting somewhere, too.
You've read these books? Well, look, Dad; what's your attitude on
precognition? The ability of the human mind to exhibit real knowledge,
apart from logical inference, of future events? You think Dunne is
telling the truth about his experiences? Or that the cases in Tyrrell's
book are properly verified, and can't be explained away on the basis of
chance?"

Blake Hartley frowned. "I don't know," he confessed. "The evidence is
the sort that any court in the world would accept, if it concerned
ordinary, normal events. Especially the cases investigated by the
Society for Psychical Research: they _have_ been verified. But how can
anybody know of something that hasn't happened yet? If it hasn't
happened yet, it doesn't exist, and you can't have real knowledge of
something that has no real existence."

"Tyrrell discusses that dilemma, and doesn't dispose of it. I think I
can. If somebody has real knowledge of the future, then the future must
be available to the present mind. And if any moment other than the bare
present exists, then all time must be totally present; every moment must
be perpetually coexistent with every other moment," Allan said.

[Illustration]

"Yes. I think I see what you mean. That was Dunne's idea, wasn't it?"

"No. Dunne postulated an infinite series of time dimensions, the entire
extent of each being the bare present moment of the next. What I'm
postulating is the perpetual coexistence of every moment of time in this
dimension, just as every graduation on a yardstick exists equally with
every other graduation, but each at a different point in space."

"Well, as far as duration and sequence go, that's all right," the father
agreed. "But how about the 'Passage of Time'?"

"Well, time _does_ appear to pass. So does the landscape you see from a
moving car window. I'll suggest that both are illusions of the same
kind. We imagine time to be dynamic, because we've never viewed it from
a fixed point, but if it is totally present, then it must be static, and
in that case, we're moving through time."

"That seems all right. But what's your car window?"

"If all time is totally present, then you must exist simultaneously at
every moment along your individual life span," Allan said. "Your
physical body, and your mind, and all the thoughts contained in your
mind, each at its appropriate moment in sequence. But what is it that
exists only at the bare moment we think of as _now_?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Blake Hartley grinned. Already, he was accepting his small son as an
intellectual equal.

"Please, teacher; what?"

"Your consciousness. And don't say, 'What's that?' Teacher doesn't know.
But we're only conscious of one moment; the illusory now. This is 'now,'
and it was 'now' when you asked that question, and it'll be 'now' when I
stop talking, but each is a different moment. We imagine that all those
nows are rushing past us. Really, they're standing still, and our
consciousness is whizzing past them."

His father thought that over for some time. Then he sat up. "Hey!" he
cried, suddenly. "If some part of our ego is time-free and passes from
moment to moment, it must be extraphysical, because the physical body
exists at every moment through which the consciousness passes. And if
it's extraphysical, there's no reason whatever for assuming that it
passes out of existence when it reaches the moment of the death of the
body. Why, there's logical evidence for survival, independent of any
alleged spirit communication! You can toss out Patience Worth, and Mrs.
Osborne Leonard's Feda, and Sir Oliver Lodge's son, and Wilfred Brandon,
and all the other spirit-communicators, and you still have evidence."

"I hadn't thought of that," Allan confessed. "I think you're right.
Well, let's put that at the bottom of the agenda and get on with this
time business. You 'lose consciousness' as in sleep; where does your
consciousness go? I think it simply detaches from the moment at which
you go to sleep, and moves backward or forward along the line of
moment-sequence, to some prior or subsequent moment, attaching there."

"Well, why don't we know anything about that?" Blake Hartley asked. "It
never seems to happen. We go to sleep tonight, and it's always tomorrow
morning when we wake; never day-before-yesterday, or last month, or next
year."

"It never ... or almost never ... _seems_ to happen; you're right there.
Know why? Because if the consciousness goes forward, it attaches at a
moment when the physical brain contains memories of the previous,
consciously unexperienced, moment. You wake, remembering the evening
before, because that's the memory contained in your mind at that moment,
and back of it are memories of all the events in the interim. See?"

"Yes. But how about backward movement, like this experience of yours?"

"This experience of mine may not be unique, but I never heard of another
case like it. What usually happens is that the memories carried back by
the consciousness are buried in the subconscious mind. You know how
thick the wall between the subconscious and the conscious mind is. These
dreams of Dunne's, and the cases in Tyrrell's book, are leakage. That's
why precognitions are usually incomplete and distorted, and generally
trivial. The wonder isn't that good cases are so few; it's surprising
that there are any at all." Allan looked at the papers in front of him.
"I haven't begun to theorize about how I managed to remember everything.
It may have been the radiations from the bomb, or the effect of the
narcotic, or both together, or something at this end, or a combination
of all three. But the fact remains that my subconscious barrier didn't
function, and everything got through. So, you see, I am obsessed--by my
own future identity."

"And I'd been afraid that you'd been, well, taken-over by some ... some
outsider." Blake Hartley grinned weakly. "I don't mind admitting, Allan,
that what's happened has been a shock. But that other ... I just
couldn't have taken that."

       *       *       *       *       *

"No. Not and stayed sane. But really, I am your son; the same entity I
was yesterday. I've just had what you might call an educational short
cut."

"I'll say you have!" His father laughed in real amusement. He discovered
that his cigar had gone out, and re-lit it. "Here; if you can remember
the next thirty years, suppose you tell me when the War's going to end.
This one, I mean."

"The Japanese surrender will be announced at exactly 1901--7:01 P. M.
present style--on August 14. A week from Tuesday. Better make sure we
have plenty of grub in the house by then. Everything will be closed up
tight till Thursday morning; even the restaurants. I remember, we had
nothing to eat in the house but some scraps."

"Well! It is handy, having a prophet in the family! I'll see to it Mrs.
Stauber gets plenty of groceries in.... Tuesday a week? That's pretty
sudden, isn't it?"

"The Japs are going to think so," Allan replied. He went on to describe
what was going to happen.

His father swore softly. "You know, I've heard talk about atomic energy,
but I thought it was just Buck Rogers stuff. Was that the sort of bomb
that got you?"

"That was a firecracker to the bomb that got me. That thing exploded a
good ten miles away."

Blake Hartley whistled softly. "And that's going to happen in thirty
years! You know, son, if I were you, I wouldn't like to have to know
about a thing like that." He looked at Allan for a moment. "Please, if
you know, don't ever tell me when I'm going to die."

Allan smiled. "I can't. I had a letter from you just before I left for
the front. You were seventy-eight, then, and you were still hunting, and
fishing, and flying your own plane. But I'm not going to get killed in
any Battle of Buffalo, this time, and if I can prevent it, and I think I
can, there won't be any World War III."

"But--You say all time exists, perpetually coexistent and totally
present," his father said. "Then it's right there in front of you, and
you're getting closer to it, every watch tick."

Allan Hartley shook his head. "You know what I remembered, when Frank
Gutchall came to borrow a gun?" he asked. "Well, the other time, I
hadn't been home: I'd been swimming at the Canoe Club, with Larry
Morton. When I got home, about half an hour from now, I found the house
full of cops. Gutchall talked the .38 officers' model out of you, and
gone home; he'd shot his wife four times through the body, finished her
off with another one back of the ear, and then used his sixth shot to
blast his brains out. The cops traced the gun; they took a very poor
view of your lending it to him. You never got it back."

"Trust that gang to keep a good gun," the lawyer said.

"I didn't want us to lose it, this time, and I didn't want to see you
lose face around City Hall. Gutchalls, of course, are expendable," Allan
said. "But my main reason for fixing Frank Gutchall up with a padded
cell was that I wanted to know whether or not the future could be
altered. I have it on experimental authority that it can be. There must
be additional dimensions of time; lines of alternate probabilities.
Something like William Seabrook's witch-doctor friend's Fan-Shaped
_Destiny_. When I brought memories of the future back to the present, I
added certain factors to the causal chain. That set up an entirely new
line of probabilities. On no notice at all, I stopped a murder and a
suicide. With thirty years to work, I can stop a world war. I'll have
the means to do it, too."

"The means?"

"Unlimited wealth and influence. Here." Allan picked up a sheet and
handed it to his father. "Used properly, we can make two or three
million on that, alone. A list of all the Kentucky Derby, Preakness, and
Belmont winners to 1970. That'll furnish us primary capital. Then,
remember, I was something of a chemist. I took it up, originally, to get
background material for one of my detective stories; it fascinated me,
and I made it a hobby, and then a source of income. I'm thirty years
ahead of any chemist in the world, now. You remember _I. G.
Farbenindustrie_? Ten years from now, we'll make them look like pikers."

His father looked at the yellow sheet. "Assault, at eight to one," he
said. "I can scrape up about five thousand for that--Yes; in ten
years--Any other little operations you have in mind?" he asked.

"About 1950, we start building a political organization, here in
Pennsylvania. In 1960, I think we can elect you President. The world
situation will be crucial, by that time, and we had a good-natured
nonentity in the White House then, who let things go till war became
inevitable. I think President Hartley can be trusted to take a strong
line of policy. In the meantime, you can read Machiavelli."

"That's my little boy, talking!"

Blake Hartley said softly. "All right, son; I'll do just what you tell
me, and when you grow up, I'll be president.... Let's go get supper,
now."

_BOOKEND_




I


Altamont cast a quick, routine glance at the instrument panels
and then looked down through the transparent nose of the
helicopter at the yellow-brown river five hundred feet below.
Next he scraped the last morsel from his plate and ate it.

"What did you make this out of, Jim?" he asked. "I hope you kept
notes while you were concocting it. It's good."

"The two smoked pork chops left over from yesterday evening,"
Loudons said, "and that bowl of rice that's been taking up space
in the refrigerator the last couple of days, together with a
little egg powder and some milk. I ground the chops up and mixed
them with the rice and other stuff. Then added some bacon, to
make grease to fry it in."

Altamont chuckled. That was Loudons, all right: he could take a
few left-overs, mess them together, pop them in the skillet, and
have a meal that would turn the chef back at the Fort green with
envy. He filled his cup and offered the pot.

"Caffchoc?" he asked.

Loudons held his cup out to be filled, blew on it, sipped, and
then hunted on the ledge under the desk for the butt of the cigar
he had half-smoked the evening before.

"Did you ever drink coffee, Monty?" the socio-psychologist asked,
getting the cigar drawing to his taste.

"Coffee? No. I've read about it, of course. We'll have to
organize an expedition to Brazil, sometime, to get seeds and try
raising some."

Loudons blew a smoke ring toward the rear of the cabin.

"A much overrated beverage," he replied. "We found some, once,
when I was on that expedition into Idaho, in what must have been
the stockroom of a hotel. Vacuum-packed in moisture-proof
containers, and free from radioactivity. It wasn't nearly as good
as caffchoc.

"But then, I suppose, a pre-bustup coffee drinker couldn't
stomach this stuff we're drinking."

Loudons looked forward, up the river they were following. "Get
anything on the radio?" he asked. "I noticed you took us up to
about ten thousand, while I was shaving."

Altamont got out his pipe and tobacco pouch, filling the former
slowly and carefully.

"Not a whisper. I tried Colony Three, in the Ozarks, and I tried
to call in that tribe of workers in Louisiana. I couldn't get
either."

"Maybe if we tried to get a little more power on the set...."

That was Loudons, too, Altamont thought. There wasn't a better
man at the Fort, when it came to dealing with people. But
confront him with a problem about things and he was lost.

That was one of the reasons why he and the stocky, phlegmatic social
scientist made such a good team, he thought. As far as he, himself,
was concerned, people were just a mysterious, exasperatingly
unpredictable order of things which were subject to no known natural
laws.

And Loudons thought the same thing about machines: he couldn't
psychoanalyze them.

Altamont gestured with his pipe toward the nuclear-electric
conversion unit, between the control-cabin and the living
quarters in the rear of the boxcar-sized helicopter.

"We have enough power back there to keep this windmill in the air
twenty-four hours a day, three hundred and sixty-five days a
year, for the next fifteen years," he said. "We just don't have
enough radio. If I'd step up the power on this set any more, it'd
burn out before I could say, 'Altamont calling Fort Ridgeway.'"

"How far are we from Pittsburgh now?" Loudons wanted to know.

Altamont looked across the cabin at the big map of the United
States as they had been, the red and green and blue and yellow
patchwork of vanished political divisions. The colors gleamed
through the transparent overlay on which this voyage of
re-discovery was plotted.

The red line of their journey started at Fort Ridgeway, in what
had been Arizona. It angled east by a little north, to Colony
Three, in northern Arkansas ... sharply northeast to St. Louis
and its lifeless ruins ... then to Chicago and Gary, where little
bands of Stone Age reversions stalked and fought and ate each
other ... Detroit, where things that had completely forgotten
they were human emerged from their burrows only at night ...
Cleveland, where a couple of cobalt bombs must have landed in the
lake and drenched everything with radioactivity that still
lingered after two centuries ... Akron, where vegetation was only
beginning to break through the glassy slag ... Cincinnati, where
they had last stopped....

"How's the leg this morning, Jim?" he asked.

"Little stiff. Doesn't hurt much, though."

"Why, we're about fifty miles, as we follow that river, and
that's relatively straight." He looked down through the
transparent nose of the copter at a town, now choked with trees
that grew among the tumbled walls. "I think that's Aliquippa."

Loudons looked and shrugged, then looked again and pointed.

"There's a bear. Just ducked into that church or movie theater or
whatever. I wonder what he thinks we are."

Altamont puffed slowly at his pipe. "I wonder if we're going to
find anything at all in Pittsburgh."

"You mean people, as distinct from those biped beasts we've found
so far? I doubt it," Loudons replied, finishing his caffchoc and
wiping his mustache with the back of his hand. "I think the whole
eastern half of the country is nothing but forest like this, and
the highest type of life is just about three cuts below Homo
Neanderthalensis, almost impossible to contact, and even more
impossible to educate."

"I wasn't thinking about that. I've just about given up hope of
finding anybody or even a reasonably high level of barbarism,"
Altamont said. "I was thinking about that cache of microfilmed
books that was buried at the Carnegie Library."

"If it was buried," Loudons qualified. "All we have is that
article in that two-century-old copy of Time about how the
people at the library had constructed the crypt and were
beginning the microfilming. We don't know if they ever had a
chance to get it finished, before the rockets started landing."

They passed over a dam of flotsam that had banked up at a
wrecked bridge and accumulated enough mass to resist the periodic
floods that had kept the river usually clear. Three human figures
fled across a sand-flat at one end of it and disappeared into the
woods. Two of them carried spears tipped with something that
sparkled in the sunlight, probably shards of glass.

"You know, Monty, I get nightmares, sometimes, thinking about
what things must be like in Europe," Loudons said.

Five or six wild cows went crashing through the brush below.
Altamont nodded when he saw them.

"Maybe tomorrow, we'll let down and shoot a cow," he said. "I was
looking in the freeze-locker and the fresh meat's getting a
little low. Or a wild pig, if we find a good stand of oak trees.
I could enjoy what you'd do with some acorn-fed pork."

He looked across the table. "Finished?" he asked Loudons. "Take
over, then. I'll go back and wash the dishes."

They rose, and Loudons, favoring his left leg, moved over to the
seat at the controls.

Altamont gathered up the two cups, the stainless-steel dishes,
and the knives and the forks and spoons, going up the steps over
the shielded converter and ducking his head to avoid the seat in
the forward top machine-gun turret. He washed and dried the
dishes, noting with satisfaction that the gauge of the water tank
was still reasonably high, and glanced out one of the windows.
Loudons was taking the big helicopter upstairs, for a better
view.

Now and then, among the trees, there would be a glint of glassy
slag, usually in a fairly small circle. That was to be expected:
beside the three or four H-bombs that had fallen on the
Pittsburgh area, mentioned in the transcripts of the last news to
reach the Fort from the outside, the whole district had been
pelted, more or less at random, with fission bombs.

West of the confluence of the Allegheny and the Monongahela, it
would probably be worse than this.

"Can you see Pittsburgh yet, Jim?" he called out.

"Yes, it's a mess! Worse than Gary, worse than Akron even."

"Monty! Come here! I think I have something!"

Picking up the pipe he had laid down, Altamont hurried forward,
dodging his six-foot length under the gun turret and swinging
down from the walkway over the converter.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Smoke. A lot of smoke, twenty or thirty fires at the very
least."

Loudons had shifted from Forward to Hover and was peering through
a pair of binoculars. "See that island, the long one? Across the
river from it, on the north side, toward this end. Yes, by
Einstein! And I can see cleared ground, and what I think are
houses, inside a stockade...."




II


Murray Hughes walked around the corner of the cabin into the
morning sunlight, lacing his trousers, with his hunting shirt
thrown over his bare shoulders. He found, without much surprise,
that his father had also slept late. Verner Hughes was just
beginning to shave.

Inside the kitchen, his mother and the girls were clattering pots
and skillets.

Outside the kitchen door, his younger brother, Hector, was
noisily chopping wood.

Going through the door, he filled another of the light-metal
basins with hot water, found his razor, and went outside again,
setting the basin on the bench.

Most of the ware in the Hughes cabin was of light-metal. Murray
and his father had mined it in the dead city up the river, from a
place where it had floated to the top of a puddle of slag, back
when the city had been blasted, at the end of the hard times.

It had been hard work, but the stuff had been easy to carry down
to where they had hidden their boat. And, for once, they'd had no
trouble with the Scowrers.

Too bad they couldn't say as much for yesterday's hunting trip!

As he rubbed lather into the stubble on his face, he cursed with
irritation. That had been a bad-luck hunt, all around.

They had gone out before dawn, hunting into the hills to the
north. They'd spent the day at it, and shot one small wild pig.
Lucky it was small, at that. They'd have had to abandon a
full-grown one, after the Scowrers had began hunting them. Six of
them, as big a band as he'd ever seen together at one time, had
managed to cut them off from the stockade. He and his father had
been forced to circle miles out of their way.

His father had shot one, and he'd had to leave his hatchet
sticking in the skull of another, when his rifle had misfired.

That meant a trip to the gunsmith's, for a new hatchet and to
have the mainspring of the rifle replaced. Nobody could afford to
have a rifle that couldn't be trusted, least of all a hunter and
prospector.

On top of everything else, he had had a few words with Alex
Barrett, the gunsmith, the other day.

Well, at least that could be smoothed over. Barrett would be glad
to do business with him, once the gunsmith saw that hard
tool-steel he had dug out of that place down the river. Hardest
steel either he or his father had ever found, and it hadn't been
atom-spoiled, either.

He cleaned, wiped and stropped his razor and put it back in the
case. He threw out the wash-water on the compost pile and went
into the cabin, putting on his shirt and his belt. Then he passed
through to the front porch, where his father was already eating
at the table.

The people of the Toon like to eat in the open. It was something
they'd always done, just as they'd always like to eat together in
the evenings.

He sweetened his cup of chicory with a lump of maple sugar and
began to sip it before he sat down, standing with one foot on the
bench and looking down across the parade ground, past the
Aitch-Cue House, toward the river and the wall.

"If you're coming around to Alex's way of thinking--and mine--it
won't hurt you to admit it, son," his father said.

Murray turned, looking at his father with the beginning of anger,
and then he grinned. The elders were constantly keeping the young
men alert with these tests. He checked back over his actions
since he had come out onto the porch.

... to the table, sugar in his chicory, one foot on the bench ...
which had reminded him again of the absence of the hatchet from
his belt and brought an automatic frown ... then the glance
toward the gunsmith's shop, and across the parade ground ... the
glance including the houses into which so much labor had gone,
the wall that had been built from rubble and topped with pointed
stakes, the white slabs of marble that marked the graves of the
First Tenant and the men of the Old Toon....

He had thought, at that moment, that maybe his father and Alex
Barrett and Reader Rawson and Tenant Mycroft Jones and the others
were right: there were too many things here that could not be
moved along with them, if they decided to move.

It would be false modesty, refusal to see things as they were, not
to admit that he was the leader of the younger men, and the boys of
the Irregulars. He had been forced to face the responsibilities of
that fact since last winter.

Then, the usual theological arguments about the proper order of
the Sacred Books and the true nature of the Risen One had been
replaced by a violent controversy when Sholto Jiminez and Birdy
Edwards had reopened the old question of the advisability of
moving the Toon and settling elsewhere.

He had been in favor of the idea himself and found that the other
young men had followed his lead. But, for the last month or so,
he had begun to doubt the wisdom of it.

It was probably reluctance to admit this to himself that had
brought on the strained feelings between himself and his old
friend, the gunsmith.

"I'll have to drill the Irregulars, today," he said. "Birdy
Edwards has been drilling them while we've been hunting. But I'll
go up and see Alex about a new hatchet and fixing my rifle. I'll
have a talk with him."

He stepped forward to the edge of the porch, still munching on a
honey-dipped piece of cornbread, and glanced up at the sky. That
was a queer bird; he had never seen a bird with a wing action
like that.

Then he realized that the object was not a bird at all.

His father was staring at it, too.

"Murray! That's ... that's like the old stories from the time of
the wars!"

But Murray was already racing across the parade ground toward the
Aitch-Cue House, where the big iron ring hung by its chain from a
gallows-like post, with a hammer beside it.




III


The stockaded village became larger, details grew plainer, as the
helicopter came slanting down and began spiraling around it.

It was a fairly big place, some forty or fifty acres in a rough
parallelogram, surrounded by a wall of varicolored stone and
brick and concrete rubble from old ruins, topped with a palisade
of pointed poles. There was a small jetty projecting into the
river, to which six or eight boats of different sorts were tied;
a gate opened onto this from the wall.

Inside the stockade, there were close to a hundred buildings,
ranging from small cabins to a structure with a belfry. It seemed
to have been a church, partly ruined in the war of two centuries
ago and later rebuilt.

A stream came down from the woods, across the cultivated land
around the fortified village. There was a rough flume which
carried the water from a dam close to the edge of the forest and
provided a fall to turn a mill wheel.

"Look, strip farming," Loudons pointed. "See the alternate strips
of grass and plowed ground. These people understand soil
conservation.

"They have horses, too."

As he spoke, three riders left the village at a gallop. They
separated, and the people in the fields, who had all started for
the village, turned and began hurrying toward the woods. Two of
the riders headed for a pasture in which cattle had been grazing
and started herding them also into the woods.

For a while, there was a scurrying of little figures in the
village below. Then, not a moving thing was in sight.

"There's good organization," Loudons said. "Everybody seems to
know what to do, and how to get it done promptly. And look how
neat the whole place is. Policed up. I'll bet anything we'll find
that they have a military organization, or a military tradition
at least.

"We'll have a lot to find out: you can't understand a people until
you understand their background and their social organization."

"Humph. Let me have a look at their artifacts: that will tell
what kind of people they are," Altamont said, swinging the
glasses back and forth over the enclosure. "Water-power mill,
water-power sawmill--building on the left side of the water
wheel, see the pile of fresh lumber beside it. Blacksmith shop,
and from that chimney, I'd say a small foundry, too.

"Wonder what that little building out on the tip of the island
is, it has a water wheel too. Undershot wheel, and it looks like
it could be raised or lowered. Now, I wonder...."

"Monty, I think we ought to land right in the middle of the
enclosure, on that open plaza thing, in front of the building
that looks like a reconditioned church. That's probably the Royal
Palace, or the Pentagon, or the Kremlin, or whatever."

Altamont started to object, paused, and then nodded. "I think
you're right, Jim. From the way they scattered, and got their
livestock into the woods, they probably expect us to bomb them.
We have to get inside and that's the quickest way to do it." He
thought for a moment. "We'd better be armed, when we go out.
Pistols, auto-carbines, and a few of those concussion-grenades in
case we have to break up a concerted attack. I'll get them."

The plaza, the houses and the cabins around it, the
two-hundred-year-old church, all were silent and apparently
lifeless as they set the helicopter down. Once Loudons caught a
movement inside the door of a house, and saw a metallic glint.

"There's a gun up there," he said. "Looks like a four-pounder.
Brass. I knew that smith-shop was also a foundry. See that little
curl of smoke? That's the gunner's slow-match.

"I'd thought maybe that thing on the island was a powder mill.
That would be where they'd put it. Probably extract their niter
from the dung of their horses and cows. Sulfur probably from
coal-mine drainage.

"Jim, this is really something!"

"I hope they don't cut loose with that thing," Loudons said,
looking apprehensively at the brass-rimmed black muzzle that was
covering them from the belfry. "I wonder if we ought to--Oh-oh,
here they come!"

Three or four young men stepped out of the wide door of the old
church. They wore fringed buckskin trousers and buckskin shirts
and odd caps of deerskin with visors to shade the eyes and
similar beaks behind to protect the neck. They had powder horns
and bullet pouches slung over their shoulders, and long rifles in
their hands. They stepped aside as soon as they were out.
Carefully avoiding any gesture of menace, they simply stood,
watching the helicopter which had landed in their village.

Three other men followed them out. They, too, wore buckskins and
the odd double-visored caps. One had a close-cropped white beard,
and on the shoulders of his buckskin shirt, he wore the single
silver bars of a first lieutenant of the vanished United States
Army. He had a pistol on his belt. The pistol had the saw-handle
grip of an automatic, but it was a flintlock, as were the rifles
of the young men who stood so watchfully on either side of the
door.

Two middle-aged men accompanied the bearded man and the trio
advanced toward the helicopter.

"All right, come on, Monty."

Loudons opened the door and let down the steps. Picking up an
auto-carbine, he slung it and stepped out of the helicopter,
Altamont behind him. They advanced to meet the party from the
church, halting when they were about twenty feet apart.

"I must apologize, lieutenant, for dropping in on you so
unceremoniously."

Loudons stopped, wondering if the man with the white beard
understood a word of what he was saying.

"The natural way to come in, when you travel in the air," the old
man replied. "At least, you came in openly. I can promise you a
better reception than that you got at the city to the west of us
a couple of days ago."

"Now how did you know that we had trouble the
day-before-yesterday?" Loudons demanded.

The old man's eyes sparkled with child-like pleasure. "That
surprises you, my dear sir? In a moment, I daresay you'll be
surprised at the simplicity of it.

"You have a nasty rip in the left leg of your trousers, and the
cloth around it is stained with blood. Through the rip, I
perceive a bandage. Obviously, you have suffered a recent wound.
I further observe that the side of your flying machine bears
recent scratches, as though from the spears or throwing hatchets
of the Scowrers. Evidently, they attacked you as you were
landing. It is fortunate that these cannibal devils are too
stupid and too anxious for human flesh to exercise patience."

"Well, that explains how you knew that we'd recently been
attacked," Loudons told him. "But how did you guess that it had
been to the west of here, in a ruined city?"

"I never guess," the oldster with the silver bar and the
keystone-shaped red patch on his left shoulder replied. "It is a
shocking habit--destructive to the logical faculties. What seems
strange to you is only so because you do not follow my train of
thought.

"For example, the wheels and their framework under your flying
machine are splashed with mud which seems to be predominantly
brick-dust, mixed with plaster. Obviously, you landed recently in
a dead city, either during or after a rain. There was a rain here
yesterday evening, the wind being from the west. Obviously, you
followed behind the rain as it came up the river. And now that I
look at your boots, I see traces of the same sort of mud, around
the soles and in front of the heels.

"But this is heartless of us, keeping you standing here on a
wounded leg, sir. Come in, and let our medic take a look at it."

"Well, thank you, lieutenant," Loudons replied. "But don't bother
your medic. I've attended to the wound myself, and it wasn't
serious to begin with."

"You are a doctor?" the white-haired man asked.

"Of sorts. A sort of general scientist. My name is Loudons. My
friend, Mr. Altamont, here, is a scientist, too."

There was an immediate reaction: all three of the elders of the
village, and the young riflemen who had accompanied them,
exchanged glances of surprise.

Loudons dropped his hand to the grip of his slung auto-carbine
and Altamont sidled away from his partner, his hand moving as if
by accident toward the butt of his pistol. The same thought was
in both men's minds, that these people might feel, as the
heritage of the war of two centuries ago, a hostility to science
and scientists.

There was no hostility, however, in their manner as the old man
came forward with outstretched hand.

"I am Tenant Mycroft Jones, the Toon Leader here," he said. "This
is Stamford Rawson, our Reader, and Verner Hughes, our Toon
Sarge. This is his son, Murray Hughes, the Toon Sarge of the
Irregulars.

"But come into the Aitch-Cue House, gentlemen. We have much to
talk about."

       *       *       *       *       *

By this time, the villagers had begun to emerge from the log
cabins and rubble-walled houses around the plaza and the old
church. Some of them, mostly the young men, were carrying rifles,
but the majority were unarmed. About half of them were women, in
short deerskin skirts or homespun dresses. There were a number of
children, the younger ones almost completely naked.

"Sarge," the old man told one of the youths, "post a guard over
this flying machine. Don't let anybody meddle with it. And have
all the noncoms and techs report here, on the double." He turned
and shouted up at the truncated steeple: "Atherton, sound 'All
Clear!'"

A horn up in the belfry began blowing, apparently to advise the
people who had run from the fields into the forest that there was
no danger.

They went through the open doorway of the old stone church and
entered the big room inside. The building had evidently once been
gutted by fire, two centuries ago, but portions of the wall had
been restored. The floor had been replaced by one of rough
planks, and there was a plank ceiling at about ten feet.

The room was apparently used as a community center. There were a
number of benches and chairs, all very neatly made; and along one
wall, out of the way, ten or fifteen long tables had been
stacked, the tops in a pile and the trestles on the tops.

The walls were decorated with trophies of weapons--a number of
M-12 rifles and M-16 submachine-guns, all in good, clean
condition; a light machine rifle; two bazookas. Among them were
cruder weapons, stone-and metal-tipped spears and clubs, the work
of the wild men of the woods.

A stairway led to the second floor, and it was up this stairway
that the man who bore the title of Toon Leader conducted them, to
a small room furnished with a long table, a number of chairs, and
several big wooden chests bound with iron.

"Sit down, gentlemen," the Toon Leader invited, going to a
cupboard and producing a large bottle stoppered with a corncob
and a number of small cups.

"It's a little early in the day," he went on, "but this is a very
special occasion.

"You smoke a pipe, I take it?" he asked Altamont. "Then try some
of this, of our own growth and curing."

He extended a doeskin moccasin, which seemed to be the tobacco
container.

Altamont looked at the thing dubiously, then filled his pipe from
it.

The oldster drew his pistol, pushed a little wooden plug into the
vent, added some tow to the priming, and, aiming at the wall,
snapped it. Evidently, at time the formality of plugging the vent
had been overlooked: there were a number of holes in the wall
there.

This time, however, the pistol didn't go off. The old man shook
out the smoldering tow, blew it into flame, and lit a candle from
it, offering the light to Altamont.

Loudons got out a cigar and lit it from the candle; the others
filled and lighted pipes. The Toon Leader reprimed his pistol,
then holstered it, took off his belt and laid it aside, an
example the others followed.

They drank ceremoniously, and then seated themselves at the
table. As they did, two more men entered the room. They were
introduced as Alexander Barrett, the gunsmith and Stanley
Markovitch, the distiller.

The Toon Leader began by asking, "You come, then, from the west?"

"Are you from Utah?" the gunsmith interrupted, suspiciously.

"Why, no, we're from Arizona. A place called Fort Ridgeway,"
Loudons said.

The others nodded, in the manner of people who wish to conceal
ignorance. It was obvious that none of them had ever heard of
Fort Ridgeway, or Arizona either.

"You say you come from a fort? Then the wars aren't over yet?"
Sarge Hughes asked.

"The wars have been over for a long time. You know how terrible
they were. You know how few in all the countries were left
alive," Loudons said.

"None that we know of, beside ourselves and the Scowrers, until
you came," the Toon Leader said.

"We have found only a few small groups, in the whole country, who
have managed to save anything of the Old Times. Most of them
lived in little villages and cultivated land. A few had horses or
cows. None, that we have ever found before, made guns and powder
for themselves. But they remembered that they were men, and did
not eat one another.

"Whenever we find a group of people like this, we try to persuade
them to let us help them."

"Why?" the Toon Leader asked. "Why do you do this for people that
you have never met before? What do you want from them--from
us--in return for your help?"

He was speaking to Altamont, rather than to Loudons. It seemed
obvious that he believed Altamont to be the leader and Loudons
the subordinate.

"Because we are trying to bring back the best of the Old Times,"
Altamont told him. "Look, you have had troubles, here. So have
we, many times. Years when the crops didn't ... didn't...." He
looked at Loudons, aware that his partner should be talking now,
and also suddenly aware that Loudons had recognized the situation
and left the leadership up to him....

"... years that the crops failed. Years of storms, or floods.
Troubles with those beast-men in the woods.

"And you were alone, as we were, with no one to help.

"We want to put all men who are still men in touch with one
another, so that they can help each other in trouble, and work
together.

"If this isn't done, everything that makes men different from
beasts will soon be no more."

"He's right. One of us, alone, is helpless," the Reader said. "It
is only in the Toon that there is strength. He wants to organize
a Toon of all Toons."

"That's about it. We are beginning to make helicopters, like the
one Loudons and I came in. We'll furnish your community with one
or more of them. We can give you a radio, so that you can
communicate with other communities. We can give you rifles and
machine guns and ammunition, to fight the--the Scowrers, did you
call them? And we can give you atomic engines, so that you can
build machines for yourselves."

"Some of our people,--Alex Barrett here, the gunsmith, and Stan
Markovitch, the distiller, and Harrison Grant, the iron-worker--get
their living by making things. How'd they make out, after your machines
came in here?" Verner Hughes asked.

"We've thought of that. We had that problem with other groups
we've helped," Loudons said. "In some communities, everybody owns
everything in common and so we don't have much of a problem. Is
that the way you do it, here?"

"Well, no. If a man makes a thing, or digs it out of the ruins,
or catches it in the woods, it's his."

"Then we'll work out some way. Give the machines to the people
who are already in a trade, or something like that. We'll have to
talk it over with you and with the people concerned."

"How is it you took so long finding us?" Alex Barrett asked.
"It's been two hundred or so years since the Wars."

"Alex! You see but you do not observe!" The Toon Leader rebuked.
"These people have their flying machines, which are highly
complicated mechanisms. They would have to make tools and
machines to make them, and tools and machines to make those tools
and machines. They would have to find materials, often going in
search of them. The marvel is not that they took so long, but
that they did it so quickly."

"That's right," Altamont said. "Originally, Fort Ridgeway was a
military research and development center. As the country became
disorganized, the Government set this project up to develop ways
of improvising power and transportation and communication methods
and extracting raw materials. If they'd had a little more time,
they might have saved the country.

"As it was, they were able to keep themselves alive, and keep
something like civilization going at the Fort, while the whole
country was breaking apart around them.

"Then, when the rockets stopped falling, they started to rebuild.
Fortunately, more than half the technicians at the Fort were
women, so there was no question of them dying out.

"But it's only been in the last twenty years that we've been able
to make nuclear-electric engines, and this is the first time any
of us have gotten east of the Mississippi."

"How did your group manage to survive?" Loudons asked. "You call
it the Toon. I suppose that's what the word platoon has become,
with time. You were, originally, a military platoon?"

"Pla-toon!" the white-bearded man said. "Of all the unpardonable
stupidities! Of course that's what it was. And the title, Tenant,
was originally lieu-tenant. I know that, though we have dropped
all use of the first part of the word. But that should have led
me, if I had used my wits, to deduce platoon from toon."

The Tenant shook his head in dismay at his stupidity and Loudons
found himself forced to say, "One syllable like that could have
come from many words."




IV


The Tenant smiled at Loudons and said, "Your courtesy does not
excuse our stupidity. We know our history and we should have
identified the word accurately.

"Yes, we were originally a ... a pla-toon of soldiers, two hundred
years ago, at the time when the Wars ended. The old Toon, and the
First Tenant, were guarding POWs, and there, sir,"--to Loudons--"is a
word we cannot trace. We have no idea what they were. In any event,
the pows were all killed by a big bomb, and the First Tenant,
Lieutenant Gilbert Dunbar, took his platoon and started to march to
DeeCee, where the government was.

"But there was no government any more.

"They fought with people along the way. When they needed food, or
ammunition, or animals to pull their wagons, they took them, and
killed those who tried to prevent them. Other people joined the
toon, and when they found women they wanted, they took them.

"They did all sorts of things that would have been crimes if
there had been any law, but since there was no law, it was
obvious that they could be no crime.

"The First Ten--Lieutenant--kept his men together, because he had
The Books. Each evening, at the end of each day's march, he read
to his men out of them."

Altamont knew without looking at his associate that Loudons would
be inconspicuously jotting down notes. The last was an item the
sociologist would be sure to record: the white-bearded Tenant had
pronounced that reference to a written testament in capital
letters.

The story was continuing....

"... finally, they came here. There had been a town here, but it
had been burned and destroyed, and there were people camping in
the ruins.

"Some of them fought and were killed, others came in and joined
the platoon.

"At first, they built shelters around this building and made this
their fort. Then they cleared away the ruins, and built new
houses. When the cartridges for the rifles began to get scarce,
they began to make gunpowder, and new rifles, like these we are
using now, to shoot without cartridges.

"Lieutenant Dunbar did this out of his own knowledge because
there is nothing in The Books about making gunpowder. The guns in
The Books are rifles and shotguns and revolvers and airguns.
Except for the airguns, which we haven't been able to make, these
all shot cartridges.

"As with your people, we did not die out because we too had
women. Neither did we increase greatly--too many died or were
killed young. But several times we've had to tear down the wall
and rebuild it, to make room inside for more houses. And we've
been clearing out a little more land for the fields each year.

"We still read and follow the teachings of The Books: we have
made laws for ourselves out of them."

There was a silence during which Altamont felt himself to be the
focus of attention; not obtrusively, but, nonetheless, insistently.
However, this was Loudon's field and Altamont preferred not to
speak.

"And we are waiting for the Slain and Risen One," Tenant Jones
added, and there was no doubt that he was looking at Altamont
intently. "It is impossible that He will not, sooner or later,
deduce the existence of this community, if He has not done so
already."

Again the silence and lack of movement, broken by Loudons this
time, when he picked up the candle to re-lit his cigar.
Mentally, Altamont thanked his partner.

"Well, sir," the Toon Leader changed the subject abruptly,
"enough of this talk about the past. If I understand rightly, it
is the future in which you gentlemen are interested." He pushed
back the cuff of his hunting shirt and looked at an old and worn
wrist watch. "Eleven hundred: we'll have lunch shortly.

"This afternoon, you will meet the other people of the Toon, and
this evening, at eighteen hundred, we'll have a mess together.
Then, when we have everyone together, we can talk over your offer
to help us, and decide what it is that you can give us that we
can use."

"You spoke, a while ago, of what you could do for us, in return,"
Altamont said. He knew that now he would have to be the one to
stress their original mission: Loudons would probably be so
fascinated by this society that the sociologist might never
remember the primary reason for coming to Pittsburgh.

"There's one thing you can do, no further away than tomorrow, if
you're willing."

He had no time to wonder at the interchange of glances around the
table before the Toon Leader said, "And that is--?"

"In Pittsburgh, somewhere, there is an underground crypt, full of
books. Not printed and bound books, but spools of microfilm. Do
you know what that is?"

The men of the Toon shook their heads. Altamont continued:

"They are spools on which strips of films are wound and on which
pictures have been taken of books, page by page. We can make
other, larger pictures from them, big enough to be read--"

"Oh, photographs, which you can enlarge. I can understand that.
You mean, you can make many copies of them?"

"That's right. And you shall have copies, as soon as we can take
the originals back to Fort Ridgeway, where we have the equipment
for enlarging them. But while we have information which will help
us to find the crypt where the books are, we will need help in
getting it open."

"Of course! This is wonderful. Copies of The Books!" the Reader
exclaimed. "We thought that we had the only one left in the
world!"

"Not just The Books, Stamford, other books," the Toon Leader
told him. "The books mentioned in The Books. But of course we
will help you. You have a map to show where they are?"

"Not a map, just some information. But we can work out the
location of the crypt."

"A ritual," Stamford Rawson said happily. "Of course!"




V


They lunched together at the house of Toon Sarge Hughes with the
Toon Leader and the Reader and five or six of the leaders of the
community. The food was plentiful, but Altamont found himself
wishing that the first book they found in the Carnegie Library
crypt would be a cook-book.

In the afternoon, he and Loudons separated.

Loudons attached himself to the Tenant, the Reader and an old
woman, Irene Klein, who was almost a hundred years old and was
the repository and arbiter of most of the community's oral
legends.

Altamont, on the other hand, started with Alex Barrett, the
gunsmith, and Mordecai Ricci, the miller, to inspect the gunshop
and the grist mill. They were later joined by a half dozen more
of the village craftsmen and so also visited the forge and
foundry, the sawmill and the wagon shop. Altamont additionally
looked at the flume, a rough structure of logs lined with sheet
aluminum; and at the nitriary, a shed-roofed pit in which
potassium nitrate was extracted from the community's animal
refuse.

But he reversed matters when it came to visiting the powder mill
on the island: he became the host and took them by helicopter to
the island and then for a trip up the river.

The guests were a badly-scared lot, for the first few minutes, as
they watched the ground receding under them through the
transparent plastic nose. Then, when nothing serious seemed to be
happening, exhilaration took the place of fear. By the time they
set down on the tip of the island, the eight men were confirmed
aviation enthusiasts.

The trip up-river was an even bigger success, the high point
coming when Altamont set his controls for Hover, pointed out a
snarl of driftwood in the stream, and allowed his passengers to
fire one of the machine-guns at it.

The lead balls of their own black-powder rifles would have
plunked into the water-logged wood without visible effect. The
copper-jacketed machine-gun bullets ripped it to splinters.

They returned for a final visit to the distillery awed by what
they had seen.




VI


"Monty, I don't know what the devil to make of this crowd,"
Loudons said, that evening, after the feast, when they had
entered the helicopter and were preparing to retire.

"We've run into some weird communities--that lot down in New
Mexico who live in the church and claim that they have a divine
mission to redeem the world by prayer, fasting, and flagellation.

"Or those yogis in Los Angeles--"

"Or the Blackout Boys in Detroit!" Altamont interrupted. He had
good reason to remember them.

"That's understandable," Loudons said, "after what their
ancestors went through in the last war. And so are the others, in
their own way.

"But this crowd here!" Loudons put down his cigar and began
chewing on his mustache, a sure sign that he was more than
puzzled: he was a very worried man.

Altamont respected his partner's abilities in this area. However,
he also knew that the best way to get his friend to work any
problem was to have him do it in conversation.

"What has you stopped, Jim?"

"Number of things, Monty. They're hard to explain because--" the
sociologist shrugged, winced a little as the gesture pushed his
leg down on the edge of his bunk--"well, let me just mention
them.

"These people are the descendants of an old United States Army
platoon, yet they have a fully-developed religion centered on a
slain and resurrected god.

"Now, Monty, with all due respect to the old US Army, that just
doesn't make sense! Normally, it would take thousands of years for a
slain-god religion to develop, and then only in a special situation,
from the field-fertility magic of primitive agriculturists.

"Well, you saw those people's fields from the air. Some members
of that old platoon were men who knew the latest methods of
scientific farming. They didn't need naive fairy tales about the
planting and germination of seed."

"Sure this religion isn't just a variant of Christianity?"

"Absolutely not!

"In the first place, these Sacred Books cannot be the Bible--you
heard Tenant Jones say that they mentioned firearms that used
cartridges. That means they can't be older than 1860 at the
earliest.

"And, in the second place, this slain god wasn't crucified, or
put to death by any form of execution: he perished, together with
his enemy, in combat, and both god and devil were later
resurrected."

Loudons picked up his cigar again. "By the way, the Enemy is
supposed to be the master-mind back of these cannibal savages in
the woods and also in the ruins."

"Did you get a look at these Sacred Books, or find out what they
might be?"

Loudons shook his head disgustedly. "Every time I brought up the
question, they evaded me. The Tenant sent the Reader out to bring
in this old lady, Irene Klein--she was a perfect gold-mine of
information about the history and traditions of the platoon, by
the way--and then he sent the Reader out on some other errand,
undoubtedly to pass the word around not to talk to us about their
religion."

"I don't get that," Altamont said. "They showed me
everything--their gunshop, their powder mill, their defenses,
everything."

He smoked in silence for a moment, then added, in an apologetic
tone, "Jim, I'm sure you've thought of this: the slain god
couldn't be the original platoon commander, could he?"

"I've thought of it, and he isn't, Monty.

"No, definitely not, though they have the greatest respect for
his memory--decorate his grave regularly, drink toasts to him,
and so on. But he hasn't been deified. They got the idea for this
god of theirs out of the Sacred Books."

Loudons put the cigar down again and returned to chewing his
mustache. "Monty, this has me worried like the devil:

"I believe that they suspect that you are the Slain and Risen
One!"

Altamont considered the idea, then nodded slowly. "Could be, at
that. I know the Tenant came up to me, very respectfully, and
said, 'I hope you don't think, sir, that I was presumptuous in
trying to display my humble deductive abilities to you.'"

"What did you say?" Loudons demanded rather sharply.

"Told him certainly not, that he'd used a good, quick method of
demonstrating that he and his people weren't like those mindless
subhumans in the woods."

"That was all right," Loudons approved, but then his worries
returned. "I don't know how we're going to handle this--"

"Jim, how about that pows business? Is there something there?"

"Monty!" Loudons voice was drily chiding as he took a pad of
paper and scribbled briefly. "Take a look and figure for
yourself."

Altamont looked at the paper. Loudons had simply printed the
first three letters of the word in capitals and separated each
letter with a period. "Ouch! Yes, of course, that's what an
infantry platoon would be guarding.

"Go ahead, Jim, this is your end of our business. I'll stay out
of it and, especially, I'll keep my mouth shut."

"I don't think you'll be able to," Loudons said soberly. "As
things stand now, they only suspect that you are their deity.

"And that means this: we're on trial here!"

"We have been in spots like this before, Jim," Altamont reminded
his friend.

"Not like this, Monty, and let me explain.

"I get the impression here that logic, not faith, is the supreme
religious virtue. And get this, Monty, because it's something
practically unheard of: skepticism is a religious obligation, not
a sin!

"I wish I knew...."




VII


Tenant Mycroft Jones, Reader Stamford Rawson, Toon Sarge Verner
Hughes, and his son, Murray Hughes, sat around the bare-topped
table in the room on the second floor of the Aitch-Cue House. A
lighted candle flickered in the cool breeze that came in through
the open window, throwing their shadows back and forth on the
walls.

"Pass the tantalus, Murray," the Tenant said, and the youngest of
the four handed the corncob-corked bottle to the eldest. Tenant
Jones filled his cup and then sat staring at it, while Verner
Hughes thrust his pipe into the toe of the moccasin and filled
it. Finally, the Tenant drank about half the clear, wild-plum
brandy.

"Gentlemen, I am baffled," he confessed. "We have three alternate
possibilities here and we dare not disregard any of them.

"Either this man who calls himself Altamont is truly He, or his
is merely what we are asked to believe, one of a community of men
like ours, with more of the old knowledge than we possess."

"You know my views," Verner Hughes said. "I cannot believe that
He was more than a man, as we are. A great, a good, a wise man,
but a man and mortal."

"Let's not go into that, now." The Reader emptied his cup and
took the bottle, filling it again. "You know my views, too. I
hold that He is no longer upon earth in the flesh, but lives in
the spirit and is only with us in the spirit.

"But you said there were three possibilities, none of which can
be eliminated. What was your third possibility, Tenant?"

"That they are creatures of the Enemy, perhaps that one or the
other of them is the Enemy."

Reader Rawson, lifting his cup to his lips, almost strangled. The
Hugheses, father and son stared at Tenant Jones in horror.

"The Enemy--with such weapons and resources!" Murray Hughes
gasped. Then he emptied his cup and refilled it. "No! I can't
believe that: he would have struck before this and wiped us all
out!"

"Not necessarily, Murray," the Tenant replied. "Until he became
convinced that his agents, the Scowrers, could do nothing
against us, he would bide his time. He sits motionless, like a
spider, at the center of the web; he does little himself; his
agents are numerous.

"Or, perhaps, he wishes to recruit us into this hellish
organization."

"It is a possibility," the Reader admitted, "and one which we can
neither accept or reject safely. And we must learn the truth as
soon as possible. If this man is really He, we must not spurn Him
on mere suspicion. If he is a man, come to help us, we must
accept his help; if he is speaking the truth, the people who sent
him could do wonders for us, and the greatest wonder would be to
make us again a part of a civilized community.

"And if he is the Enemy...." Rawson left the sentence unfinished,
but his face was grim.

"But if he is really He," Murray said, a little diffidently, for
he was not yet accustomed to being included in the council of the
elders, "I think we are on trial."

"What do you mean, son? Oh, I see. Of course, I don't believe
that he is, but that's mere doubt, not negative certainty.
However, if I'm wrong, if this man is truly He, we are worthy of
him, we will penetrate his disguise."

"A very pretty problem, gentlemen," the Tenant said, smacking his
lips over his brandy, "for all that it may be a deadly serious
one for us. There is, of course, nothing we can do tonight. But,
tomorrow, we have promised to help our visitors, whoever they may
be, in searching for this crypt in the city.

"Murray, you were to be in charge of the detail that was to
accompany them. Carry on as arranged, and say nothing of our
suspicions, but advise your men to keep a sharp watch on the
strangers, that they may learn all they can from them.

"Stamford, you and Verner and I will go along. We should, if we
have any wits at all, observe something."




VIII


"Listen to this infernal thing!" Altamont raged. "'Wielding a
gold-plated spade handled with oak from an original rafter of the
Congressional Library, at three-fifteen one afternoon last
week--' One afternoon last week!" He cursed luridly. "Why
couldn't that blasted magazine say what afternoon? I've gone over
a lot of twentieth century copies of that magazine and that
expression was a regular cliche with them."

Loudons looked over his shoulder at the photostated magazine
page.

"Well, we know it was between June thirteen and nineteen,
inclusive," he said. "And there's a picture of the university
president, complete with gold-plated spade, breaking ground. Call
it Wednesday, the sixteenth. Over there's the tip of the shadow
of the old Cathedral of Learning, about a hundred yards away.
There are so many inexactitudes, that one'll probably cancel out
the other."

"That's so, and it's also pretty futile getting angry at somebody
who's been dead two hundred years, but why couldn't they say
Wednesday, or Monday, or Saturday, or whatever?"

Monty checked back in the astronomical handbook, and the
photostated pages of the old almanac, then looked over his
calculations. "All right, here is the angle of the shadow, and
the compass-bearing.

"I had a look, yesterday, when I was taking the local citizenry
on that junket. The old baseball diamond at Forbes Field is
plainly visible, and I located the ruins of the Cathedral of
Learning from that.

"Here's the above-sea-level altitude of the top of the tower.
After you've landed us, go up to this altitude--use the
barometric altimeter, not the radar--and hold position."

Loudons leaned forward from the desk to the contraption Altamont
had rigged up in the nose of the helicopter; one of the
telescope-sighted hunting rifles clamped in a vise, with a
compass and a spirit-level under it.

"Rifle's pointing downward at the correct angle now?" he asked.
"Good. Then all I have to do is to hold the helicopter steady,
keep it at the right altitude, level and pointed in the right
direction, and watch through the sight while you move the flag
around, and direct you by radio."

"Simple, if I had been born quintuplets!"

"Mr. Altamont! Doctor Loudons!" a voice outside the helicopter
called. "Are you ready for us now?"

Altamont went to the open door and looked out. The old Toon
Leader, the Reader, Toon Sarge Hughes, his son and four young men
in buckskins with slung rifles were standing outside.

"I have decided," the Tenant said, "that Mr. Rawson and Sarge
Hughes and I would be of more help than an equal number of young
men. We may not be as active, but we do know the old ruins
better, especially the paths and hiding places of the Scowrers.
These four young men you probably met last evening, but it will
do no harm to introduce them again.

"Birdy Edwards; Sholto Jiminez; Jefferson Burns; Murdo Olsen."

"Very pleased, Tenant, gentlemen. I met all of you young men last
evening and I remember you," Altamont said. "Now, if you'll crowd
in here, I'll explain what we're going to try to do."

He showed them the old picture. "You see where the shadow of a
tall building falls?" he asked. "We know the height and location
of this building. Doctor Loudons will hold this helicopter at
exactly the position of the top of the building and aim through
the sights of the rifle, there. One of you will have this flag in
his hand, and will move it back and forth. Doctor Loudons will
tell us when the flag is in sight of the rifle."

"He'll need a good pair of lungs to do that," Verner Hughes
commented.

"We'll use the radio. A portable set on the ground, and the
helicopter's radio set," Altamont said.

To his surprise, he was met with looks of incomprehension. He had
not supposed that these people would have lost all memory of
radio communication.

"Why, that's wonderful!" the Reader exclaimed, when the
explanation was concluded. "You can talk directly. How much
better than just sending a telegram!"

"But, finding the crypt by the shadow, that's exactly like the--"
Murray Hughes began, then stopped short. Immediately, he began
talking about the rifle that was to be used as a surveying
transit, comparing it with the ones in the big first-floor room
at the Aitch-Cue House.

Locating the point where the shadow of the old Cathedral of
Learning had fallen proved easier than either Altamont or Loudons
had expected. The towering building was now a tumbled mass of
slagged rubble, but it was quite possible to determine its
original center, and with the old data from the excellent
reference library at Fort Ridgeway, its height above sea level
was known. After a little jockeying, the helicopter came to a
hovering stop, and the slanting barrel of the rifle in the vise
pointed downward along the line of the shadow that had been cast
on that afternoon in June, 1993.

The cross-hairs of the scope sight centered almost exactly on the
spot Altamont had estimated on the map.

Guiding himself by peering through the rifle-sight, Loudons
brought the helicopter slanting down to land on the sheet of
fused glass that had once been a grassy campus.

"Well, this is probably it," Altamont said. "We didn't have to
bother fussing around with that flag after all. That hump over
there looks as though it had been a small building, and there's
nothing corresponding to it on the city map. That may be the
bunker over the stair-head to the crypt."

They began unloading equipment--a small, portable
nuclear-electric conversion unit, a powerful solenoid-hammer,
crowbars and intrenching tools, tins of blasting plastic. They
took out the two hunting rifles and the auto-carbines, and
Altamont showed the young men of Murray Hughes' detail how to use
them.

"If you will pardon me, sir," the Tenant said to Altamont, "I
think it would be a good idea if your companion went up in the
flying machine and circled over us, to keep watch for the
Scowrers. There are quite a few of them, particularly farther up
the rivers, to the east, where the damage was not so great and
they can find cellars and shelters and buildings to live in."

"Good idea. That way, we won't have to put out guards," Altamont
said. "From the looks of this, we'll need every body to help dig
into that thing. Hand out one of the portable radios, Jim and go
up to about a thousand feet. If you see anything suspicious, give
us a yell, then spray it with bullets, and find out what it is
afterward."

They waited until the helicopter had climbed to position and was
circling above, and then turned their attention to the place
where the sheet of fused earth and stone bulged upward. It must
have been almost ground-zero of one of the hydrogen-bombs: the
wreckage of the Cathedral of Learning had fallen predominantly to
the north, and the Carnegie Library was tumbled to the east.

"I think the entrance would be on this side, toward the Library,"
Altamont said. "Let's try it, to begin with."

He used the solenoid-hammer, slowly pounding a hole in the glaze,
and placed a small charge of the plastic explosive. Chunks of the
lava-like stuff pelted down between the little mound and the huge
one of the old library, blowing a hole six feet in diameter and
the two and a half feet deep, revealing concrete bonded with
crushed steel-mill slag.

"We missed the door," Altamont said. "That means we'll have to
tunnel in through who knows how much concrete. Well...."

He used a second and larger charge, after digging a hole a foot
deep. When he and his helpers came up to look, they found a large
mass of concrete blown out, and solid steel behind it. Altamont
cut two more holes, one on either side of the blown-out place,
and fired a charge in each of them, bringing down more concrete.

He found he hadn't missed the door after all. It had merely been
concreted over.

A few more shots cleared it, and after some work, they got it
open. There was a room inside, concrete-floored and entirely
empty. Altamont stood in the doorway and inspected the interior
with his flashlight; he heard somebody behind him say something
about a most peculiar sort of dark-lantern.

Across the small room, on the opposite wall, was a bronze plaque.

The plaque carried quite a lengthy inscription, including the
names of all the persons and institutions participating in the
microfilm project. The History Department at the Fort would be
interested in that, but the only thing that interested Altamont
was the statement that the floor had been laid over the trapdoor
leading to the vault where the microfilms were stored. He went
outside to the radio.

"Hello, Jim. We're inside, but the films were stored in an
underground vault, and so we have to tear up a concrete floor,"
he said. "Go back to the village and gather up all the men you
can carry. I don't want to use explosives inside. The interior of
the crypt oughtn't to be damaged. Besides, I don't know what a
blast in there might do to the film, and I don't want to take any
chances."

"No, of course not. How thick do you think the floor is?"

"Haven't the least idea. Plenty thick, I would guess. Those films
would have to be well-buried, to shield them from radioactivity.
We can expect that it will take some time."

"All right. I'll be back as soon as I can."

The helicopter turned and went windmilling away, over what had
been the Golden Triangle, down the Ohio. Altamont went back to
the little concrete bunker and sat down, lighting his pipe.
Murray Hughes and his four riflemen spread out, one circling
around the glazed butte that had been the Cathedral of Learning,
another climbing to the top of the old Library, and the others
taking positions to the south and east.

Altamont sat in silence, smoking his pipe and trying to form some
conception of the wealth under that concrete floor.

It was no use.

Jim Loudons probably understood a little more clearly what those
books would mean to the world of today, and what they could do
toward shaping the world of the future.

There was a library at Fort Ridgeway, and it was an excellent one ...
for its purpose. In 1996, when the rockets had come crashing
down, it had contained the cream of the world's technical
knowledge--and very little else. There was only a little fiction,
a few books of ideas, just enough to give the survivors a
tantalizing glimpse of the world of their fathers.

But now....

       *       *       *       *       *

A rifle banged to the south and east, and banged again. Either
Murray Hughes or Birdy Edwards: it was one of the two hunting
rifles from the helicopter.

On the heels of the reports, they heard a voice shouting,
"Scowrers! A lot of them, coming from up the river!"

A moment later, there was a light whip-crack of one of the
muzzleloaders, from the top of the old Carnegie Library, and
Altamont could see a wisp of grey-white smoke drifting away from
where it had been fired.

Altamont jumped to his feet and raced for the radio, picking it
up and bring it to the bunker.

Tenant Jones, old Reader Rawson, and Verner Hughes had caught up
their rifles. The Tenant was shouting. "Come on in! Everybody,
come on in!"

The boy on top of the library began scrambling down. Another came
running from the direction of the half-demolished Cathedral of
Learning, a third from the baseball field that had served as
Altamont's point of reference the afternoon before.

The fourth, Murray Hughes, was running in from the ruins of the
old Carnegie Tech buildings, and Birdy Edwards sped up the main
road from Schenley Park. Once, twice, as he ran, Murray Hughes
paused, turned, and fired behind him.

Then his pursuers came into sight!

They ran erect, they wore a few rags of skin garments, and they
carried spears and hatchets and clubs, so they were probably
classifiable as men. But their hair was long and unkempt, and
their bodies were almost black with dirt and from the sun. A few
of them were yelling, but most of them ran silently. They ran
more swiftly than the boy they were pursuing: the distance
between them narrowed every moment. There were at least fifty of
them.

Verner Hughes' rifle barked, one of them dropped. As cooly as
though he were shooting squirrels instead of his son's pursuers,
he dropped the butt of the rifle to the ground, poured a charge
of powder, patched a ball and rammed it home, replaced the
ramrod. Tenant Jones fired then, and Birdy Edwards joined them,
beginning to shoot with the telescope-sighted rifle.

The young man who had been north of the Cathedral of Learning had
one of the auto-carbines; luckily, Altamont had providently set
the control for semi-auto before giving it to him. He dropped to
one knee and began to empty the clip, shooting slowly and
deliberately, picking off the runners who were in the lead.

The boy who had started to climb down off the Library halted,
fired his flintlock, and began reloading it.

Altamont, sitting down and propping his elbows on his knees, took
both hands to the automatic which was his only weapon, emptying
the magazine and replacing it. The last three savages he shot in
the back: they had had enough and were running for their lives.

So far, everybody was safe. The boy in the Library came down
through a place where the wall had fallen. Murray Hughes stopped
running and came slowly toward the bunker, putting a fresh clip
into his rifle. The others came drifting in.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Altamont, calling Loudons," the scientist from Fort Ridgeway was
saying into the radio. "Monty to Jim: can you hear me?"

Silence.

"We'd better get ready for another attack," Birdy Edwards said.
"There's another gang coming from down that way. I never saw so
many Scowrers!"

"Maybe there's a reason, Birdy," Tenant Jones said. "The Enemy is
after big game, this time."

"Jim, where the devil are you?" Altamont fairly yelled into the
radio; and as he did, he knew the answer. Loudons was in the
village, away from the helicopter, gathering tools and workers.

Nothing to do but keep on trying!

"Here they come!" Reader Rawson warned.

"How far can these rifles be depended on?" Birdy Edwards wanted
to know.

Altamont straightened, saw the second band of savages approaching
about four hundred yards away.

"Start shooting now," he said. "Aim for the upper part of their
bodies."

The two auto-loading rifles began to crack. After the first few
shots, the savages took cover. Evidently they understood the
capabilities and limitations of the villagers' flintlocks, but
this was a terrifying surprise to them.

"Jim!"--Altamont was almost praying into the radio--"Come in,
Jim!"

"What is it, Monty? I was outside."

Altamont told him.

"Those fellows you had up with you yesterday, think they could
be trusted to handle the guns? A couple of them are here with
me," Loudons inquired.

"Take a chance on it! It won't cost anything but my life, and
that's not worth much at the present."

"All right, hold on. We'll be there in a few minutes."

"Loudons is bringing the helicopter," Altamont told the others.
"All we have to do is to hold on, here, until he comes."

A naked savage raised his head from behind what might, two
hundred years ago, have been a cement park-bench and he was only
a hundred yards away. Reader Rawson promptly killed him and began
reloading.

"I think you're right, Tenant," he said. "The Scowrers have never
attacked in bands like this before. They must have a powerful
reason and I can think of only one."

"That's what I'm beginning to think, too," Verner Hughes agreed.
"At least, we've eliminated the third of your possibilities,
Tenant. And I think probably the second, as well."

Altamont wondered what they were double-talking about. There
wasn't any particular mystery about the mass attack of the wild
men to him.

Debased as they were, they still possessed speech and the ability
to transmit experiences. No matter how beclouded in superstition,
they still remembered that aircraft dropped bombs, and bombs
killed people, and where people had been killed, they would find
fresh meat. They had seen the helicopter circling about, and had
heard the blasting: everyone in the area had been drawn to the
scene as soon as Loudons had gone down the river.

But they seemed to have forgotten that aircraft carried guns,
although they did spring to their feet and start to run at the
return of the helicopter.

However, most of them did not run far.




IX


Altamont and Loudons shook hands many times in front of the
Aitch-Cue House, and listened to many good wishes, and repeated
their promise to return. Most of the microfilmed books were to be
stored in the old church. They were taking with them only the
catalogue and a few of the most important works. Finally, they
entered the helicopter. The crowd shouted farewell as they rose.

Altamont, at the controls, waited until they had gained five
thousand feet, then turned on a compass-course for Colony Three.

"I can't wait until we're in radio range of the Fort, Jim. This
is one report that I really want to make," he said.

"Of all the wonderful luck!" he went on. "And I don't know which
is the more important: finding those books, or finding those
people. In a few years, when we can get them supplied with modern
equipment and instructed in its use--

"What's the matter, Jim? You should be even more excited than I
am."

"I'm not very happy about this, Monty," Loudons confessed. "I
keep thinking about what's going to happen to them."

"Why, nothing's going to happen to them. They're going to be
given the means of producing more food, keeping more of them
alive, giving them more leisure to develop themselves in--"

"Monty, I saw the Sacred Books."

"The deuce! What were they?"

"It. One volume. A collection of works. We have it at the Fort
and I've read it. How I ever missed all those clues--"

"You see, Monty, what I'm worried about is what's going to happen
to those people when they find out that we're not really Sherlock
Holmes and Doctor Watson...."

_BOOKEND_



Chester Pelton retracted his paunch as far as the breakfast seat would
permit; the table, its advent preceded by a collection of
mouth-watering aromas, slid noiselessly out of the pantry and clicked
into place in front of him.

"Everything all right, Miss Claire?" a voice floated out after it from
beyond. "Anything else you want?"

"Everything's just fine, Mrs. Harris," Claire replied. "I suppose Mr.
Pelton'll want seconds, and Ray'll probably want thirds and fourths of
everything." She waved a hand over the photocell that closed the
pantry door, and slid into place across from her brother, who already
had a glass of fruit juice in one hand and was lifting platter covers
with the other.

"Real eggs!" the boy was announcing. "Bacon. Wheat-bread toast." He
looked again. "Hey, Sis, is this real cow-made butter?"

"Yes. Now go ahead and eat."

As though Ray needed encouragement, Chester Pelton thought, watching
his son use a spoon--the biggest one available--to dump gobs of honey
on his toast. While he was helping himself to bacon and eggs, he could
hear Ray's full-mouthed exclamation: "This is real bee-comb honey,
too!" That pleased him. The boy was a true Pelton; only needed one
bite to distinguish between real and synthetic food.

"Bet this breakfast didn't cost a dollar under five C," Ray continued,
a little more audibly, between bites.

[Illustration:]

That was another Pelton trait; even at fifteen, the boy was learning
the value of money. Claire seemed to disapprove, however.

"Oh, Ray; try not to always think of what things cost," she reproved.

"If I had all she spends on natural food, I could have a this-season's
model 'copter-bike, like Jimmy Hartnett," Ray continued.

Pelton frowned. "I don't want you running around with that boy, Ray,"
he said, his mouth full of bacon and eggs. Under his daughter's look
of disapproval, he swallowed hastily, then continued: "He's not the
sort of company I want my son keeping."

"But, Senator," Ray protested. "He lives next door to us. Why, we can
see Hartnett's aerial from the top of our landing stage!"

"That doesn't matter," he said, in a tone meant to indicate that the
subject was not to be debated. "He's a Literate!"

"More eggs, Senator?" Claire asked, extending the platter and
gesturing with the serving knife.

He chuckled inwardly. Claire always knew what to do when his temper
started climbing to critical mass. He allowed her to load his plate
again.

"And speaking of our landing stage, have you been up there, this
morning, Ray?" he asked.

They both looked at him inquiringly.

"Delivered last evening, while you two were out," he explained. "New
winter model Rolls-Cadipac." He felt a glow of paternal pleasure as
Claire gave a yelp of delight and aimed a glancing kiss at the top of
his bald head. Ray dropped his fork, slid from his seat, and bolted
for the lift, even bacon, eggs, and real bee-comb honey forgotten.

With elaborate absent-mindedness, Chester Pelton reached for the
switch to turn on the video screen over the pantry door.

"Oh-oh! Oh-oh!" Claire's slender hand went out to stop his own. "Not
till coffee and cigarettes, Senator."

"It's almost oh-eight-fifteen; I want the newscast."

"Can't you just relax for a while? Honestly, Senator, you're killing
yourself."

"Oh, rubbish! I've been working a little hard, but--"

"You've been working too hard. And today, with the sale at the store,
and the last day of the campaign--"

"Why the devil did that idiot of a Latterman have the sale advertised
for today, anyhow?" he fumed. "Doesn't he know I'm running for the
Senate?"

"I doubt it," Claire said. "He may have heard of it, the way you've
heard about an election in Pakistan or Abyssinia, or he just may not
know there is such a thing as politics. I think he does know there's a
world outside the store, but he doesn't care much what goes on in it."
She pushed her plate aside, poured a cup of coffee, and levered a
cigarette from the Readilit, puffing at it with the relish of the
morning's first smoke. "All he knows is that we're holding our sale
three days ahead of Macy & Gimbel's."

"Russ is a good businessman," Pelton said seriously. "I wish you'd
take a little more interest in him, Claire."

"If you mean what I think you do, no thanks," Claire replied. "I
suppose I'll get married, some day--most girls do--but it'll be to
somebody who can hang his business up at the office before he comes
home. Russ Latterman is so married to the store that if he married me
too, it'd be bigamy. Ready for your coffee?" Without waiting for an
answer, she filled his cup and ejected a lighted cigarette from the
box for him, then snapped on the video screen.

It lit at once, and a nondescriptly handsome young man was grinning
toothily out of it. He wore a white smock, halfway to his knees, and,
over it, an old-fashioned Sam Browne belt which supported a bulky
leather-covered tablet and a large stylus. On the strap which crossed
his breast five or six little metal badges twinkled.

"... Why no other beer can compare with delicious, tangy, Cardon's
Black Bottle. Won't you try it?" he pleaded. "Then you will see for
yourself why millions of happy drinkers always Call For Cardon's. And
now, that other favorite of millions, Literate First Class Elliot C.
Mongery."

Pelton muttered: "Why Frank sponsors that blabbermouth of a Mongery--"

Ray, sliding back onto the bench, returned to his food.

"Jimmy's book had pictures," he complained, forking up another mixture
of eggs, bacon, toast and honey.

"Book?" Claire echoed. "Oh, the instructions for the 'copter?"

"Pipe down, both of you!" Pelton commanded. "The newscast--"

Literate First Class Elliot C. Mongery, revealed by a quick left
quarter-turn of the pickup camera, wore the same starchy white smock,
the same Sam Browne belt glittering with the badges of the
organizations and corporations for whom he was authorized to practice
Literacy. The tablet on his belt, Pelton knew, was really a
camouflaged holster for a small automatic, and the gold stylus was a
gas-projector. The black-leather-jacketed bodyguards, of course, were
discreetly out of range of the camera. Members of the Associated
Fraternities of Literates weren't exactly loved by the non-reading
public they claimed to serve. The sight of one of those starchy,
perpetually-spotless, white smocks always affected Pelton like a red
cape to a bull. He snorted in disdain. The raised eyebrow toward the
announcer on the left, the quick, perennially boyish smile, followed
by the levelly serious gaze into the camera--the whole act might have
been a film-transcription of Mongery's first appearance on the video,
fifteen years ago. At least, it was off the same ear of corn.

"That big hunk of cheese," Ray commented. For once, Pelton didn't
shush him; that was too close to his own attitude, at least in
family-breakfast-table terminology.

"... First of all; for the country, and especially the Newer New York
area, and by the way, it looks as though somebody thought somebody
needed a little cooling off, but we'll come to that later. Here's the
forecast: Today and tomorrow, the weather will continue fine; warm in
the sun, chilly in the shadows. There won't be anything to keep you
from the polls, tomorrow, except bird-hunting, or a last chance at a
game of golf. This is the first time within this commentator's memory
that the weather has definitely been in favor of the party out of
power.

"On the world scene: You'll be glad to hear that the survivors of the
wrecked strato-rocket have all been rescued from the top of Mount
Everest, after a difficult and heroic effort by the Royal Nepalese Air
Force.... The results of last week's election in Russia are being
challenged by twelve of the fourteen parties represented on the
ballot; the only parties not hurling accusations of fraud are the
Democrats, who won, and the Christian Communists, who are about as
influential in Russian politics as the Vegetarian-Anti-Vaccination
Party is here.... The Central Diplomatic Council of the Reunited
Nations has just announced, for the hundred and seventy-eighth time,
that the Arab-Israel dispute has been finally, definitely and
satisfactorily settled. This morning's reports from Baghdad and Tel
Aviv only list four Arabs and six Israelis killed in border clashes in
the past twenty-four hours, so maybe they're really getting things
patched up, after all. During the same period, there were more
fatalities in Newer New York as a result of clashes between the
private troops of rival racket gangs, political parties and business
houses.

"Which brings us to the local scene. On my way to the studio this
morning, I stopped at City Hall, and found our genial Chief of Police
Delaney, 'Irish' Delaney to most of us, hard at work with a portable
disintegrator, getting rid of record disks and recording tapes of old
and long-settled cases. He had a couple of amusing stories. For
instance, a lone Independent-Conservative partisan broke up a
Radical-Socialist mass meeting preparatory to a march to demonstrate
in Double Times Square, by applying his pocket lighter to one of the
heat-sensitive boxes in the building and activating the sprinkler
system. By the time the Radicals had gotten into dry clothing, there
was a, well, sort of, impromptu Conservative demonstration going on in
Double Times Square, and one of the few things the local gendarmes
won't stand for is an attempt to hold two rival political meetings in
the same area.

"Curiously, while it was the Radicals who got soaked, it was the
Conservatives who sneezed," Mongery went on, his face glowing with
mischievous amusement. "It seems that while they were holding a
monster rally at Hague Hall, in North Jersey Borough, some person or
persons unknown got at the air-conditioning system with a tank of
sneeze gas, which didn't exactly improve either the speaking style of
Senator Grant Hamilton or the attentiveness of his audience. Needless
to say, there is no police investigation of either incident. Election
shenanigans, like college pranks, are fair play as long as they don't
cause an outright holocaust. And that, I think, is as it should be,"
Mongery went on, more seriously. "Most of the horrors of the Twentieth
and Twenty-first Centuries were the result of taking politics too
seriously."

Pelton snorted again. That was the Literate line, all right; treat
politics as a joke and an election as a sporting event, let the
Independent-Conservative grafters stay in power, and let the Literates
run the country through them. Not, of course, that he disapproved of
those boys in the Young Radical League who'd thought up that
sneeze-gas trick.

"And now, what you've been waiting for," Mongery continued. "The final
Trotter Poll's pre-election analysis." A novice Literate advanced,
handing him a big loose-leaf book, which he opened with the reverence
a Literate always displayed toward the written word. "This," he said,
"is going to surprise you. For the whole state of Penn-Jersey-York,
the poll shows a probable Radical-Socialist vote of approximately
thirty million, an Independent-Conservative vote of approximately ten
and a half million, and a vote of about a million for what we call the
Who-Gives-A-Damn Party, which, frankly, is the party of your
commentator's choice. Very few sections differ widely from this
average--there will be a much heavier Radical vote in the Pittsburgh
area, and traditionally Conservative Philadelphia and the upper Hudson
Valley will give the Radicals a much smaller majority."

They all looked at one another, thunderstruck.

"If Mongery's admitting that, I'm in!" Pelton exclaimed.

"Yeah, we can start calling him Senator, now, and really mean it," Ray
said. "Maybe old Mongie isn't such a bad sort of twerp, after all."

"Considering that the Conservatives carried this state by a
substantial majority in the presidential election of two years ago,
and by a huge majority in the previous presidential election of 2136,"
Mongery, in the screen, continued, "this verdict of the almost
infallible Trotter Poll needs some explaining. For the most part, it
is the result of the untiring efforts of one man, the dynamic new
leader of the Radical-Socialists and their present candidate for the
Consolidated States of North America Senate, Chester Pelton, who has
transformed that once-moribund party into the vital force it is today.
And this achievement has been due, very largely, to a single slogan
which he had hammered into your ears: _Put the Literates in their
place; our servants, not our masters!_" He brushed a hand
deprecatingly over his white smock and fingered the badges on his
belt.

"There has always been, on the part of the Illiterate public, some
resentment against organized Literacy. In part, it has been due to the
high fees charged for Literate services, and to what seems, to many,
to be monopolistic practices. But behind that is a general attitude of
anti-intellectualism which is our heritage from the disastrous wars of
the Twentieth and Twenty-first Centuries. Chester Pelton has made
himself the spokesman of this attitude. In his view, it was men who
could read and write who hatched the diabolical political ideologies
and designed the frightful nuclear weapons of that period. In his
mind, Literacy is equated with '_Mein Kampf_' and '_Das Kapital_',
with the A-bomb and the H-bomb, with concentration camps and blasted
cities. From this position, of course, I beg politely to differ.
Literate men also gave us the Magna Charta and the Declaration of
Independence.

"Now, in spite of a lunatic fringe in the Consolidated Illiterates'
Organization who want just that, Chester Pelton knows that we cannot
abolish Literacy entirely. Even with modern audio-visual recording,
need exists for some modicum of written recording, which can be
rapidly scanned and selected from--indexing, cataloguing, tabulating
data, et cetera--and for at least a few men and women who can form and
interpret the written word. Mr. Pelton, himself, is the owner of a
huge department store, employing over a thousand Illiterates; he must
at all times have the services of at least fifty Literates."

"And pays through the nose for them, too!" Pelton growled. It was more
than fifty; and Russ Latterman had been forced to get twenty extras
sent in for the sale.

"Now, since we cannot renounce Literacy entirely, without sinking to
_fellahin_ barbarism, and here I definitely part company with Mr.
Pelton, he fears the potential power of organized Literacy. In a word,
he fears a future Literate Dictatorship."

"Future? What do you think we have now?" Pelton demanded.

"Nobody," Mongery said, as though replying to him, "is stupid enough,
today, to want to be a dictator. That ended by the middle of the
Twenty-first Century. Everybody knows what happened to Mussolini, and
Hitler, and Stalin, and all their imitators. Why, it is as much the
public fear of Big Government as the breakdown of civil power because
of the administrative handicap of a shortage of Literate
administrators that is responsible for the disgraceful lawlessness of
the past hundred years. Thus, it speaks well for the public trust in
Chester Pelton's known integrity and sincerity that so many of our
people are willing to agree to his program for socialized Literacy.
They feel that he can be trusted, and, violently as I disagree with
him, I can only say that that trust is not misplaced.

"Of course, there is also the question, so often raised by Mr. Pelton,
that under the Hamilton machine, the politics, and particularly the
enforcement of the laws, in this state, are unbelievably corrupt, but
I wonder--"

Mongery paused. "Just a moment; I see a flash bulletin being brought
in." The novice Literate came to his side and gave him a slip of
paper, at which he glanced. Then he laughed heartily.

"It seems that shortly after I began speaking, the local blue-ribbon
grand jury issued a summons for Chief Delaney to appear before them,
with all his records. Unfortunately, the summons could not be served;
Chief Delaney had just boarded a strato-rocket from Tom Dewey Field
for Buenos Aires." He cocked an eye at the audience. "I know Irish is
going to have a nice time, down there in the springtime of the
Southern Hemisphere. And, incidentally, the Argentine is one of the
few major powers which never signed the World Extradition Convention
of 2087." He raised his hand to his audience. "And now, until tomorrow
at breakfast, sincerely yours for Cardon's Black Bottle, Elliot C.
Mongery."

"Well, whattaya know; that guy was plugging for you!" Ray said. "And
see how he managed to slide in that bit about corruption, right before
his stooge handed him that bulletin?"

"I guess every Literate has his price," Chester Pelton said. "I wonder
how much of my money that cost. I always wondered why Frank Cardon
sponsored Mongery. Now I know. Mongery can be had."

"Uh, beg your pardon, Mr. Pelton," a voice from the hall broke in.

He turned. Olaf Olafsson, the 'copter driver, was standing at the
entrance to the breakfast nook, a smudge of oil on his cheek and his
straw-colored hair in disorder. "How do I go about startin' this new
'copter?"

"What?" Olaf had been his driver for ten years. He would have been
less surprised had the ceiling fallen in. "You don't know how to start
it?"

"No, sir. The controls is all different from on the summer model.
Every time I try to raise it, it backs up; if I try to raise it much
more, we won't have no wall left on the landing stage."

"Well, isn't there a book?"

"There ain't no pictures in it; nothing but print. It's a Literate
book," Olaf said in disgust, as though at something obscene. "An'
there ain't nothin' on the instrument board but letters."

"That's right," Ray agreed. "I saw the book; no pictures in it at
all."

"Well, of all the quarter-witted stupidity! The confounded imbeciles
at that agency--"

Pelton started to his feet. Claire unlocked the table and slid it out
of his way. Ray, on a run, started for the lift and vanished.

"I think some confounded Literate at the Rolls-Cadipac agency did
that," he fumed. "Thought it would be a joke to send me a Literate
instruction book along with a 'copter with a Literate instrument
board. Ah, I get it! So I'd have to call in a Literate to show me how
to start my own 'copter, and by noon they'd be laughing about it in
every bar from Pittsburgh to Plattsburg. Sneaky Literate trick!" They
went to the lift, and found the door closed in their faces. "Oh,
confound that boy!"

Claire pressed the button. Ray must have left the lift, for the
operating light went on, and in a moment the door opened. He crowded
into the lift, along with his daughter and Olaf.

On the landing stage, Ray was already in the 'copter, poking at
buttons on the board.

"Look, Olaf!" he called. "They just shifted them around a little from
the summer model. This one, where the prop-control used to be on the
old model, is the one that backs it up on the ground. Here's the one
that erects and extends the prop,"--he pushed it, and the prop snapped
obediently into place--"and here's the one that controls the lift."

An ugly suspicion stabbed at Chester Pelton, bringing with it a
feeling of frightened horror.

"How do you know?" he demanded.

Ray's eyes remained on the instrument board. He pushed another button,
and the propeller began swinging in a lazy circle; he pressed down
with his right foot, and the 'copter lifted a foot or so.

"What?" he asked. "Oh, Jimmy showed me how theirs works. Mr. Hartnett
got one like it a week ago." He motioned to Olaf, setting the 'copter
down again. "Come here; I'll show you."

The suspicion, and the horror passed in a wave of relief.

"You think you and Olaf, between you, can get that thing to school?"
he asked.

"Sure! Easy!"

"All right. You show Olaf how to run it. Olaf, as soon as you've
dropped Ray at school, take that thing to the Rolls-Cadipac agency,
and get a new one, with a proper instrument board, and a proper
picture book of operating instructions. I'm going to call Sam Huschack
up personally and give him royal hell about this. Sure you can handle
it, now?"

He watched the 'copter rise to the two thousand foot local traffic
level and turn in the direction of Mineola High School, fifty miles
away. He was still looking anxiously after it as it dwindled to a tiny
dot and vanished.

"They'll make it all right," Claire told him. "Olaf has a strong back,
and Ray has a good head."

"It wasn't that that I was worried about." He turned and looked, half
ashamed, at his daughter. "You know, for a minute, there, I thought ... I
thought Ray could read!"

"Father!" She was so shocked that she forgot the nickname they had
given him when he had announced his candidacy for Senate, in the
spring. "You didn't!"

"I know; it's an awful thing to think, but--Well, the kids today do
the craziest things. There's that Hartnett boy he runs around with;
Tom Hartnett bought Literate training for him. And that fellow
Prestonby; I don't trust him--"

"Prestonby?" Claire asked, puzzled.

"Oh, you know. The principal at school. You've met him."

Claire wrinkled her brow--just like her mother, when she was trying to
remember something.

"Oh, yes. I met him at that P.T.A. meeting. He didn't impress me as
being much like a teacher, but I suppose they think anything's good
enough for us Illiterates."

       *       *       *       *       *

Literate First Class Ralph N. Prestonby remained standing by the
lectern, looking out over the crowded auditorium, still pleasantly
surprised to estimate the day's attendance at something like
ninety-seven per cent of enrollment. That was really good; why, it was
only three per cent short of perfect! Maybe it was the new rule
requiring a sound-recorded excuse for absence. Or it could have been
his propaganda campaign about the benefits of education. Or, very
easily, it could have been the result of sending Doug Yetsko and some
of his boys around to talk to recalcitrant parents. It was good to see
that that was having some effect beside an increase in the number of
attempts on his life, or the flood of complaints to the Board of
Education. Well, Lancedale had gotten Education merged with his
Office of Communications, and Lancedale was back of him to the limit,
so the complaints had died out on the empty air. And Doug Yetsko was
his bodyguard, so most of the would-be assassins had died, also.

The "North American Anthem," which had replaced the "Star-Spangled
Banner" after the United States-Canadian-Mexican merger, came to an
end. The students and their white-smocked teachers, below, relaxed
from attention; most of them sat down, while monitors and teachers in
the rear were getting the students into the aisles and marching them
off to study halls and classrooms and workshops. The orchestra struck
up a lively march tune. He leaned his left elbow--Literates learned
early, or did not live to learn, not to immobilize the right hand--on
the lectern and watched the interminable business of getting the
students marched out, yearning, as he always did at this time, for the
privacy of his office, where he could smoke his pipe. Finally, they
were all gone, and the orchestra had gathered up its instruments and
filed out into the wings of the stage, and he looked up to the left
and said, softly:

"All right, Doug; show's over."

With a soft thud, the big man dropped down from the guard's cubicle
overhead, grinning cheerfully. He needed a shave--Yetsko always did,
in the mornings--and in his leather Literates' guard uniform, he
looked like some ogreish giant out of the mythology of the past.

[Illustration:]

"I was glad to have you up there with the Big Noise, this morning,"
Prestonby said. "What a mob! I'm still trying to figure out why we
have such an attendance."

"Don't you get it, captain?" Yetsko was reaching up to lock the door
of his cubicle; he seemed surprised at Prestonby's obtuseness. "Day
before election; the little darlings' moms and pops don't want them
out running around. We can look for another big crowd tomorrow, too."

Prestonby gave a snort of disgust. "Of course; how imbecilic can I
really get? I didn't notice any of them falling down, so I suppose you
didn't see anything out of line."

"Well, the hall monitors make them turn in their little playthings at
the doors," Yetsko said, "but hall monitors can be gotten at, and some
of the stuff they make in Manual Training, when nobody's watching
them--"

Prestonby nodded. Just a week before, a crude but perfectly operative
17-mm shotgun had been discovered in the last stages of manufacture in
the machine shop, and five out of six of the worn-out files would
vanish, to be ground down into dirks. He often thought of the stories
of his grandfather, who had been a major during the Occupation of
Russia, after the Fourth World War. Those old-timers didn't know how
easy they'd had it; they should have tried to run an Illiterate high
school.

Yetsko was still grumbling slanders on the legitimacy of the student
body. "One of those little angels shoots me, it's just a cute little
prank, and we oughtn't to frown on the little darling when it's just
trying to express its dear little personality, or we might give it
complexes, or something," he falsettoed incongruously. "And if the
little darling's mistake doesn't kill me outright and I shoot back,
people talk about King Herod!" He used language about the Board of
Education and the tax-paying public that was probably subversive
within the meaning of the Loyalty Oath. "I wish I had a pair of 40-mm
auto-cannons up there, instead of that sono gun."

"Each class is a little worse than the one before; in about five
years, they'll be making H-bombs in the lab," Prestonby said. In the
last week, a dozen pupils had been seriously cut or blackjacked in
hall and locker-room fights. "Nice citizens of the future; nice future
to look forward to growing old in."

"We won't," Yetsko comforted him. "We can't be lucky all the time; in
about a year, they'll find both of us stuffed into a broom closet,
when they start looking around to see what's making all the stink."

       *       *       *       *       *

Prestonby took the thick-barreled gas pistol from the shelf under the
lectern and shoved it into his hip pocket; Yetsko picked up a
two-and-a-half foot length of rubber hose and tucked it under his left
arm. Together, they went back through the wings and out into the
hallway that led to the office. So a Twenty-second Century high school
was a place where a teacher carried a pistol and a tear-gas projector
and a sleep-gas gun, and had a bodyguard, and still walked in danger
of his life from armed 'teen-age hooligans. It was meaningless to ask
whose fault it was. There had been the World Wars, and the cold-war
interbellum periods--rising birth rates, huge demands on the public
treasury for armaments, with the public taxed to the saturation point,
and no money left for the schools. There had been fantastic
"Progressive" education experiments--even in the 'Fifties of the
Twentieth Century, in the big cities, children were being pushed
through grade school without having learned to read. And when there
had been money available for education, school boards had insisted on
spending it for audio-visual equipment, recordings, films, anything
but textbooks. And there had been that lunatic theory that children
should be taught to read by recognizing whole words instead of
learning the alphabet. And more and more illiterates had been shoved
out of the schools, into a world where radio and television and moving
pictures were supplanting books and newspapers, and more and more
children of illiterates had gone to school without any desire or
incentive to learn to read. And finally, the illiterates had become
Illiterates, and literacy had become Literacy.

And now, the Associated Fraternities of Literates had come to
monopolize the ability to read and write, and a few men like William
R. Lancedale, with a handful of followers like Ralph N. Prestonby,
were trying--

The gleaming cleanliness of the corridor, as always, heartened
Prestonby a little; it was a trophy of victory from his first two days
at Mineola High School, three years ago. He remembered what they had
looked like when he had first seen them.

"This school is a pig pen!" he had barked at the janitorial force.
"And even if they are Illiterates, these children aren't pigs; they
deserve decent surroundings. This school will be cleaned, immediately,
from top to bottom, and it'll be kept that way."

The janitors, all political appointees, Independent-Conservative
party-hacks, secure in their jobs, had laughed derisively. The
building superintendent, without troubling to rise, had answered him:

"Young man, you don't want to get off on the wrong foot, here," he had
said. "This here's the way this school's always been run, an' it's
gonna take a lot more than you to change it."

The fellow's name, he recalled, was Kettner; Lancedale had given him
a briefing which had included some particulars about him. He was an
Independent-Conservative ward-committeeman. He had gotten his present
job after being fired from his former position as mailman for
listening to other peoples' mail with his pocket recorder-reproducer.

"Yetsko," he had said. "Kick this bum out on his face."

"You can't get away with--" Kettner had begun. Yetsko had yanked him
out of his chair with one hand and started for the door with him.

"Just a moment, Yetsko," he had said.

Thinking that he was backing down, they had all begun grinning at him.

"Don't bother opening the door," he had said. "Just kick him out."

After the third kick, Kettner had gotten the door open, himself; the
fourth kick sent him across the hall to the opposite wall. He pulled
himself to his feet and limped away, never to return. The next
morning, the school was spotless. It had stayed that way.

Beside him, Yetsko must also have returned mentally to the past.

"Looks better now than it did when we first saw it, captain," he said.

"Yes. It didn't take us as long to clean up this mess as it did to
clean up that mutinous guards company in Pittsburgh. But when we
cleaned that up, it stayed cleaned. This is like trying to bail out a
boat with a pitchfork."

"Yeah. I wish we'dda stayed in Pittsburgh, captain. I wish we'd never
seen this place!"

"So do I!" Prestonby agreed, heartily.

No, he didn't, either. If he'd never have come to Mineola High School,
he'd never have found Claire Pelton.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sitting down again at the breakfast table with her father, Claire
levered another cigarette out of the Readilit and puffed at it with
exaggeratedly bored slowness. She was still frightened. Ray shouldn't
have done what he did, even if he had furnished a plausible
explanation. The trouble with plausible explanations was having to
make them. Sooner or later, you made too many, and then you made one
that wasn't so plausible, and then all the others were remembered, and
they all looked phony. And why had the Senator had to mention Ralph?
Was he beginning to suspect the truth about that, too?

I hope not! she thought desperately. If he ever found out about that,
it'd kill him. Just kill him, period!

Mrs. Harris must have turned off the video, after they had gone up to
the landing stage. To cover her nervousness, she reached up and
snapped it on again. The screen lit, and from it a young man with dark
eyes under bushy black brows was shouting angrily:

"... Most obvious sort of conspiracy! If the Radical-Socialist Party
leaders, or the Consolidated Illiterates' Organization Political
Action Committee, need any further evidence of the character of their
candidate and idolized leader, Chester Pelton, the treatment given to
Pelton's candidacy by Literate First Class Elliot C. Mongery, this
morning, ought to be sufficient to remove the scales from the eyes of
the blindest of them. I won't state, in so many words, that Chester
Pelton's sold out the Radical-Socialists and the Consolidated
Illiterates' Organization to the Associated Fraternities of Literates,
because, since no witness to any actual transfer of money can be
found, such a statement would be libelous--provided Pelton had nerve
enough to sue me."

"Why, you dirty misbegotten illegitimate--!" Pelton was on his feet.
His hand went to his hip, and then, realizing that he was unarmed and,
in any case, confronted only by an electronic image, he sat down
again.

"Pelton's been yapping for socialized Literacy," the man on the screen
continued. "I'm not going back to the old argument that any kind of
socialization is only the thin edge of the wedge which will pry open
the pit of horrors from which the world has climbed since the Fourth
World War. If you don't realize that now, it's no use for me to
repeat it again. But I will ask you, do you realize, for a moment,
what a program of socialized Literacy would mean, apart from the
implications of any kind of socialization? It would mean that inside
of five years, the Literates would control the whole government. They
control the courts, now--only a Literate can become a lawyer, and only
a lawyer can become a judge. They control the armed forces--only a
Literate can enter West Point or Fort MacKenzie or Chapultepec or
White Sands or Annapolis. And, if Chester Pelton's socialization
scheme goes into effect, there will be no branch of the government
which will not be completely under the control of the Associated
Fraternities of Literates!"

The screen went suddenly dark. Her father turned, to catch her with
her hand still on the switch.

"Put it back on; I want to hear what that lying pimp of a Slade
Gardner's saying about me!"

"Phooy; you'd have shot it out, yourself, if you'd had your gun on. I
saw you reaching for it. Now be quiet, and take it easy," she ordered.

He reached toward the Readilit for a cigarette, then his hand stopped.
His face was contorted with pain; he gave a gasp of suffocation.

Claire cried in dismay: "You're not going to have another of those
attacks? Where are the nitrocaine bulbs?"

"Don't ... have any ... here. Some at the office, but--"

"I told you to get more," she accused.

"Oh, I don't need them, really." His voice was steadier, now; the
spasm of pain had passed. He filled his coffee cup and sipped from it.
"Turn on the video again, Claire. I want to hear what that Gardner's
saying."

"I will not! Don't you have people at party headquarters monitoring
this stuff? Well, then. Somebody'll prepare an answer, if he needs
answering."

"I think he does. A lot of these dumbos'll hear that and believe it.
I'll talk to Frank. He'll know what to do."

Frank again. She frowned.

"Look, Senator; you think Frank Cardon's your friend, but I don't
trust him. I never could," she said. "I think he's utterly and
entirely unscrupulous. Amoral, I believe, is the word. Like a savage,
or a pirate, or one of the old-time Nazis or Communists."

"Oh, Claire!" her father protested. "Frank's in a tough business--you
have no idea the lengths competition goes to in the beer business--and
he's been in politics, and dealing with racketeers and labor unions,
all his life. But he's a good sound Illiterate--family Illiterate for
four generations, like ours--and I'd trust him with anything. You
heard this fellow Mongery--I always have to pause to keep from
calling him Mongrel--saying that I deserved the credit for pulling the
Radicals out of the mud and getting the party back on the tracks.
Well, I couldn't have begun to do it without Frank Cardon."

       *       *       *       *       *

Frank Cardon stood on the sidewalk, looking approvingly into the window
of O'Reilly's Tavern, in which his display crew had already set up the
spread for the current week. On either side was a giant six-foot
replica, in black glass, of the Cardon bottle, in the conventional shape
accepted by an Illiterate public as containing beer, bearing the red
Cardon label with its pictured bottle in a central white disk. Because
of the heroic size of the bottles, the pictured bottle on the label bore
a bottle bearing a label bearing a bottle bearing a bottle on a
label.... He counted eight pictured bottles, down to the tiniest dot of
black. There were four-foot bottles next to the six-foot bottles, and
three-foot bottles next to them, and, in the middle background, a
life-size tri-dimensional picture of an almost nude and incredibly
pulchritudinous young lady smiling in invitation at the passing throng
and extending a foaming bottle of Cardon's in her hand. Aside from the
printed trademark-registry statements on the labels, there was not a
printed word visible in the window.

He pushed through the swinging doors and looked down the long room,
with the chairs still roosting sleepily on the tables, and made a
quick count of the early drinkers, two thirds of them in white smocks
and Sam Browne belts, obviously from Literates' Hall, across the
street. Late drinkers, he corrected himself mentally; they'd be the
night shift, having their drinks before going home.

"Good morning, Mr. Cardon," the bartender greeted him. "Still drinking
your own?"

"Hasn't poisoned me yet," Cardon told him. "Or anybody else." He
folded a C-bill accordion-wise and set it on edge on the bar. "Give
everybody what they want."

"Drink up, gentlemen, and have one on Mr. Cardon," the bartender
announced, then lowered his voice. "O'Reilly wants to see you.
About--" He gave a barely perceptible nod in the direction of the
building across the street.

"Yes; I want to see him, too." Cardon poured from the bottle in front
of him, accepted the thanks of the house, and, when the bartender
brought the fifteen-dollars-odd change from the dozen drinks, he
pushed it back.

He drank slowly, looking around the room, then set down his empty
glass and went back, past two doors which bore pictured half-doors
revealing, respectively, masculine-trousered and feminine-stockinged
ankles, and opened the unmarked office door beyond. The bartender, he
knew, had pushed the signal button; the door was unlocked, and,
inside, O'Reilly--baptismal name Luigi Orelli--was waiting.

"Chief wants to see you, right away," the saloon keeper said.

The brewer nodded. "All right. Keep me covered; don't know how long
I'll be." He crossed the room and opened a corner-cupboard, stepping
inside.

The corner cupboard, which was an elevator, took him to a tunnel below
the street. Across the street, he entered another elevator, set the
indicator for the tenth floor, and ascended. As the car rose, he could
feel the personality of Frank Cardon, Illiterate brewer, drop from
him, as though he were an actor returning from the stage to his
dressing room.

The room into which he emerged was almost that. There was a long
table, at which two white-smocked Literates drank coffee and went over
some papers; a third Literate sprawled in a deep chair, resting; at a
small table, four men in black shirts and leather breeches and field
boots played poker, while a fifth, who had just entered and had not
yet removed his leather helmet and jacket or his weapons belt, stood
watching them.

Cardon went to a row of lockers along the wall, opened one, and took
out a white smock, pulling it over his head and zipping it up to the
throat. Then he buckled on a Sam Browne with its tablet holster and
stylus gas projector. The Literate sprawling in the chair opened one
eye.

"Hi, Frank. Feels good to have them on again, doesn't it?"

"Yes. Clean," Cardon replied. "It'll be just for half an hour, but--"

He passed through the door across from the elevator, went down a short
hall, and spoke in greeting to the leather-jacketed storm trooper on
guard outside the door at the other end.

"Mr. Cardon," the guard nodded. "Mr. Lancedale's expecting you."

"So I understand, Bert."

He opened the door and went through. William R. Lancedale rose from
behind his desk and advanced to greet him with a quick handshake,
guiding him to a chair beside the desk. As he did, he sniffed and
raised an eyebrow.

"Beer this early, Frank?" he asked.

"Morning, noon, and night, chief," Cardon replied. "When you said this
job was going to be dangerous, I didn't know you meant that it would
lead straight to an alcoholic's grave."

"Let me get you a cup of coffee, and a cigar, then." The white-haired
Literate executive resumed his seat, passing a hand back and forth
slowly across the face of the commo, the diamond on his finger
twinkling, and gave brief instructions. "And just relax, for a minute.
You have a tough job, this time, Frank."

They were both silent as a novice Literate bustled in with coffee and
individually-sealed cigars.

"At least, you're not one of these plain-living-and-right-thinking
fanatics, like Wilton Joyner and Harvey Graves," Cardon said. "On top
of everything else, that I could not take."

Lancedale's thin face broke into a smile, little wrinkles putting his
mouth in parentheses. Cardon sampled the coffee, and then used a
Sixteenth Century Italian stiletto from Lancedale's desk to perforate
the end of his cigar.

"Much as I hate it, I'll have to get out of here as soon as I can," he
said. "I don't know how long O'Reilly can keep me covered, down at the
tavern--"

Lancedale nodded. "Well, how are things going, then?"

"First of all, the brewery," Cardon began.

Lancedale consigned the brewery to perdition. "That's just your cover;
any money it makes is purely irrelevant. How about the election?"

"Pelton's in," Cardon said. "As nearly in as any candidate ever was
before the polls opened. Three months ago, the Independents were as
solid as Gibraltar used to be. Today, they look like Gibraltar after
that H-bomb hit it. The only difference is, they don't know what hit
them, yet."

"Hamilton's campaign manager does," Lancedale said. "Did you hear his
telecast, this morning?"

Cardon shook his head. Lancedale handed over a little half-inch,
thirty-minute, record disk.

"All you need is the first three or four minutes," he said. "The rest
of it is repetition."

Cardon put the disk in his pocket recorder and set it for play-back,
putting the plug in his ear. After a while, he shut it off and took
out the ear plug.

"That's bad! What are we going to do about it?"

Lancedale shrugged. "What are you going to do?" he countered. "You're
Pelton's campaign manager--Heaven pity him."

Cardon thought for a moment. "We'll play it for laughs," he decided. "Some
of our semantics experts could make the joke of the year out of it by the
time the polls open tomorrow. The Fraternities bribing their worst enemy to
attack them, so that he can ruin their business; who's been listening to a
tape of 'Alice in Wonderland' at Independent-Conservative headquarters?"

"That would work," Lancedale agreed. "And we can count on our friends
Joyner and Graves to give you every possible assistance with their
customary bull-in-a-china-shop tactics. I suppose you've seen these
posters they've been plastering around: _If you can read this,
Chester Pelton is your sworn enemy! A vote for Pelton is a vote for
your own enslavement!_"

"Naturally. And have you seen the telecast we've been using--a view of
it, with a semantically correct spoken paraphrase?"

Lancedale nodded. "And I've also noticed that those posters have been
acquiring different obscene crayon-drawings, too. That's just typical
of the short-range Joyner-Graves mentality. Why, they've made more
votes for Pelton than he's made for himself. Is it any wonder we're
convinced that people like that aren't to be trusted to formulate the
future policy of the Fraternities?"

"Well ... they've proved themselves wrong. I wonder, though, if we can
prove ourselves right, in the long run. There are times when this
thing scares me, chief. If anything went wrong--"

"What, for instance?"

"Somebody could get to Pelton." Cardon made a stabbing gesture with
the stiletto, which he still held. "Maybe you don't really know how
hot this thing's gotten. What we had to cut out of Mongery's report,
this morning--"

"Oh, I've been keeping in touch," Lancedale understated gently.

"Well then. If anything happened to Pelton, there wouldn't be a
Literate left alive in this city twelve hours later. And I question
whether or not Graves and Joyner know that."

"I think they do. If they don't, it's not because I've failed to point
it out to them. Of course, there are the Independent-Conservative
grafters; a lot of them are beginning to hear jail doors opening for
them, and they're scared. But I think routine body-guarding ought to
protect Pelton from them, or from any isolated fanatics."

"And there is also the matter of Pelton's daughter, and his son,"
Cardon said. "We know, and Graves and Joyner know, and I assume that
Slade Gardner knows, that they can both read and write as well as any
Literate in the Fraternities. Suppose that got out between now and the
election?"

"And that could not only hurt Pelton, but it would expose the work
we've been doing in the schools," Lancedale added. "And even inside
the Fraternities, that would raise the devil. Joyner and Graves don't
begin to realize how far we've gone with that. They could kick up a
simply hideous row about it!"

"And if Pelton found out that his kids are Literates--_Woooo!_" Cardon
grimaced. "Or what we've been doing to him. I hope I'm not around when
that happens. I'm beginning to like the cantankerous old bugger."

"I was afraid of that," Lancedale said. "Well, don't let it interfere
with what you have to do. Remember, Frank; the Plan has to come first,
always."

He walked with O'Reilly to the street door, talking about tomorrow's
election; after shaking hands with the saloon keeper, he crossed the
sidewalk and stepped onto the beltway, moving across the strips until
he came to the twenty m.p.h. strip. The tall office buildings of upper
Yonkers Borough marched away as he stood on the strip, appreciatively
puffing at Lancedale's cigar. The character of the street changed; the
buildings grew lower, and the quiet and fashionable ground-floor shops
and cafés gave place to bargain stores, their audio-advertisers
whooping urgently about improbable prices and offerings, and garish,
noisy, crowded bars and cafeterias blaring recorded popular music.
There was quite a bit of political advertising in evidence--huge
pictures of the two major senatorial candidates. He estimated that
Chester Pelton's bald head and bulldog features appeared twice for
every one of Grant Hamilton's white locks, old-fashioned spectacles
and self-satisfied smirk.

Then he came to the building on which he had parked his 'copter, and
left the beltway, entering and riding up to the landing stage on the
helical escalator. There seemed to have been some trouble; about a
dozen Independent-Conservative storm troopers, in their white robes
and hoods, with the fiery-cross emblem on their breasts, were bunched
together, most of them with their right hands inside their bosoms,
while a similar group of Radical-Conservative storm troopers, with
their black sombreros and little black masks, stood watching them and
fingering the white-handled pistols they wore in pairs on their belts.
Between the two groups were four city policemen, looking acutely
unhappy.

The group in the Lone Ranger uniforms, he saw, were standing in front
of a huge tri-dimensional animated portrait of Chester Pelton. As he
watched, the pictured candidate raised a clenched fist, and Pelton's
recorded and amplified voice thundered:

"_Put the Literates in their place! Our servants, not our masters!_"

He recognized the group leader of the Radical-Socialists--the masks
were too small to be more than token disguises--and beckoned to him,
at the same time walking toward his 'copter. The man in black with the
white-handled pistols followed him, spurs jingling.

"Hello, Mr. Cardon," he said, joining him. "Nothing to it. We got a
tip they were coming to sabotage Big Brother, over there. Take out our
sound-recording, and put in one of their own, like they did over in
Queens, last week. The town clowns got here in time to save
everybody's face, so there wasn't any shooting. We're staying put till
they go, though."

"_Put the Literates in their place! Our servants, not our masters!_"
the huge tridianimate bellowed.

Over in Queens, the Independents had managed to get at a similar
tridianimate, had taken out the record, and had put in one: _I am a
lying fraud! Vote for Grant Hamilton and liberty and sound
government!_

"Smart work, Goodkin," he approved. "Don't let any of your boys start
the gunplay. The city cops are beginning to get wise to who's going to
win the election, tomorrow, but don't antagonize them. But if any of
those Ku Kluxers tries to pull a gun, don't waste time trying to wing
him. Just hold on to that fiery something-or-other on his chest and
let him have it, and let the coroner worry about him."

"Yeah. With pleasure," Goodkin replied. "You know, that nightshirt
thing they wear is about the stupidest idea for a storm-troop uniform
I ever saw. Natural target in a gunfight, and in a rough-and-tumble it
gets them all tangled up. Ah, there go a couple of coppers to talk to
them; that's what they've been waiting on. Now they can beat it
without looking like they been run out by our gang."

Cardon nodded. "Tell your boys to stay around for a while; they may
expect you to leave right after they do, and then they'll try to slip
back. You did a good job; got here promptly. Be seeing you, Goodkin."

He climbed into his own 'copter and started the motor.

"_Put the Literates in their place!_" the tri-dimensional colossus
roared triumphantly after the retreating Independents. "_Our servants,
not our masters!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

At eight thousand, he got the 'copter onto the lower Manhattan beam
and relaxed. First of all, he'd have to do something about answering
Slade Gardner's telecast propaganda. That stuff was dangerous. The
answer ought to go on the air by noon, and should be stepped up
through the afternoon. First as a straight news story; Elliot Mongery
had fifteen minutes, beginning at 1215--no, that wouldn't do.
Mongery's sponsor for that time was Atomflame Heaters, and Atomflame
was a subsidiary of Canada Northwest Fissionables, and Canada
Northwest was umbilicus-deep in that Kettle River lease graft that
Pelton had sworn to get investigated as soon as he took office.
Professional ethics wouldn't allow Mongery to say anything in Pelton's
behalf on Atomflame's time. Well, there was Guthrie Parham, he came on
at 1245, and his sponsor was all right. He'd call Parham and tell him
what he wanted done.

[Illustration:]

The buzzer warned him that he was approaching the lower Manhattan
beacon; he shifted to manual control, dropped down to the
three-thousand-foot level, and set his selector beam for the signal
from Pelton's Purchasers' Paradise. Down toward the tip of the island,
in the section that had been rebuilt after that Stalin Mark XV
guided missile had gotten through the counter-rocket defenses in 1987,
he could see the quadrate cross of his goal, with public landing
stages on each of the four arms, and the higher central block with its
landing stage for freight and store personnel. Above the four public
stages, helicopters swarmed like May flies--May flies which had
mutated and invented ritual or military drill or choreography--coming
in in four streams to the tips of the arms and rising vertically from
the middle. There was about ten times the normal amount of traffic for
this early in the morning. He wondered, briefly, then remembered, and
cursed. That infernal sale!

Grudgingly, he respected Russell Latterman's smartness, and in
consequence, the ability of Wilton Joyner and Harvey Graves in
selecting a good agent to plant in Pelton's store. Latterman gave a
plausible impersonation of the Illiterate businessman, loyal Prime
Minister of Pelton's commercial empire, Generalissimo in the perpetual
war against Macy & Gimbel's. From that viewpoint, the sale was
excellent business--Latterman had gotten the jump on all the other
department stores for the winter fashions and fall sports trade. He
had also turned the store into a madhouse at the exact time when
Chester Pelton needed to give all his attention to the election.

Pressing the button that put on his private recognition signal, he
rose above the incoming customers and began to drop toward the
private landing stage, circling to get a view of the other four
stages. Maybe the sale could be turned to some advantage, at that. A
free souvenir with each purchase, carrying a Pelton-for-Senator
picture-message--

He broke off, peering down at the five-hundred-foot-square landing stage
above the central block, then brought his 'copter swooping down rapidly.
The white-clad figures he had seen swarming up the helical escalator
were not wearing the Ku Klux robes of the Independent-Conservative storm
troops, as he had first feared--they were in Literate smocks, and among
them were the black leather jackets and futuristic helmets of their
guards. They were led, he saw, by Stephen S. Bayne, the store's Chief
Literate; with him were his assistant, Literate Third Class Roger B.
Feinberg, and the novices carrying books and briefcases and cased
typewriters, and the guards, and every Literate employed in the store.
Four or five men in ordinarily vivid-colored business suits were
obviously expostulating about something. As he landed and threw back the
transparent canopy, he could hear a babel of voices, above which
Feinberg was crying: "Unfair! Unfair! Unfair to Organized Literacy!"

He jumped out and hurried over.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But you simply can't!" a white-haired man in blue-and-orange business
clothes was protesting. "If you do, the Associated Fraternities'll be
liable for losses we incur; you know that!"

Bayne, his thin face livid with anger--and also, Cardon noticed, with
what looked like a couple of fresh bruises--ignored him. Feinberg
broke off his chant of "Unfair! Unfair!" long enough to answer:

"A Literate First Class has been brutally assaulted by the Illiterate
owner of this store. Literate service for this store is, accordingly,
being discontinued, pending a decision by the Grand Council of the
local Fraternity."

Cardon grabbed the blue-and-orange clad man and dragged him to one
side.

"What happened, Hutschnecker?" he demanded.

"They're walking out on us," Hutschnecker told him, unnecessarily.
"The boss had a fight with Bayne; knocked him down a couple of times.
Bayne tried to pull his tablet gun, and I grabbed it away from him,
and somebody else grabbed Pelton before he could pull his, and a
couple of store cops got all the other Literates in the office
covered. Then Bayne put on the general-address system and began
calling out the Literates--"

"Yes, but why did Pelton beat Bayne up?"

"Bayne made a pass at Miss Claire. I wasn't there when it happened;
she came into the office--"

Cardon felt his face tighten into a frown of perplexity. That wasn't
like Literate First Class Stephen S. Bayne. He made quite a hobby of
pinching salesgirls behind the counter which was one thing; the boss'
daughter was quite another.

"Where's Latterman?" he asked, looking around.

"Down in the office, with the others, trying to help Mr. Pelton. He's
had another of those heart attacks--"

Cardon swore and ran for the descending escalator, running down the
rotating spiral to the executive floor and jumping off into the
gawking mob of Illiterate clerks crowded in the open doors of Pelton's
office. He hit and shoved and elbowed and cursed them out of the way,
and burst into the big room beyond, and then, for a moment, he was
almost sorry he had come.

Pelton was slumped in his big relaxer chair, his face pale and twisted
in pain, his breath coming in feeble gasps. His daughter was beside
him, her blond head bent over him; Russell Latterman was standing to
one side, watching intently. For an instant, Cardon was reminded of a
tomcat watching a promising mouse hole.

"Claire!" Cardon exploded, "give him a nitrocaine bulb. Why are you
all just standing around?"

Claire turned. "There are none," she said, looking at him with
desperate eyes. "The box is empty; he must have used them all."

He shot a quick glance at Latterman, catching the sales manager before
he could erase a look of triumph from his face. Things began to add
up. Latterman, of course, was the undercover man for Wilton Joyner and
Harvey Graves and the rest of the Conservative faction at Literates'
Hall, just as he, himself, was Lancedale's agent. Obsessed with
immediate advantages and disadvantages, the Joyner-Graves faction
wanted to secure the re-election of Grant Hamilton, and the way things
had been going in the past two months, only Chester Pelton's death
could accomplish that. Latterman had probably thrown out Pelton's
nitrocaine capsules and then put Bayne up to insulting Pelton's
daughter, knowing that a fit of rage would bring on another heart
attack, which could be fatal without the medicine.

"Well, send for more!"

"The prescription's in the safe," she said faintly.

The office safe was locked, and only a Literate could open it. The
double combination was neatly stenciled on the door, the numbers
spelled out as words and the letters spelled in phonetic equivalents.
All three of them--himself, Claire, and Russell Latterman--could read
them. None of them dared admit it. Latterman was fairly licking his
chops in anticipation. If Cardon opened the safe, Pelton's campaign
manager stood convicted as a Literate. If Claire opened it, the gaggle
of Illiterate clerks in the doorway would see, and speedily spread
the news, that the daughter of the arch-foe of Literacy was herself
able to read. Maybe Latterman hadn't really intended his employer to
die. Maybe this was the situation he had really intended to contrive.

Chester Pelton couldn't be allowed to die. If Grant Hamilton were
returned to the Senate, the long-range planning of William Lancedale
would suffer a crushing setback, and the public reaction would be
catastrophic. _The Plan comes first_, Lancedale had told him. He made
his decision, and then saw that he hadn't needed to make it. Claire
had straightened, left her father, crossed quickly to the safe, and
was kneeling in front of it, her back stiff with determination, her
fingers busy at the dials, her eyes going from them to the printed
combination and back again. She swung open the door, skimmed through
the papers inside, unerringly selected the prescription, and rose.

"Here, Russ; go get it filled at once," she ordered. "And hurry!"

Oh, no, you don't, Cardon thought. One chance is enough for you, Russ.
He snatched the prescription from her and turned to Latterman.

"I'll get it," he told the sales manager. "You're needed for the sale;
stay on the job here."

"But with the Literates walked out, we can't--"

Cardon blazed: "Do I have to teach you your business? Have a sample of
each item set aside at the counter, and pile sales slips under it.
And for unique items, just detach the tag and put it with the sales
slip. Now get out of here, and get cracking with it!" He picked up the
pistol that had been taken from Pelton when he had tried to draw it on
Bayne, checking the chamber and setting the safety. "Know how to use
this?" he asked Claire. "Then hang onto it, and stay close to your
father. This wasn't any accident, it was a deliberate attempt on his
life. I'll have a couple of store cops sent in here; see that they
stay with you."

He gave her no chance to argue. Pushing Latterman ahead of him, he
drove through the mob of clerks outside the door.

"... Course she can; didn't you see her open the safe?" he heard.
"... Nobody but a Literate--" "Then she's a Literate, herself!"

A couple of centuries ago, they would have talked like that if it had
been discovered that the girl were pregnant; a couple of centuries
before that, they would have been equally horrified if she had been
discovered to have been a Protestant, or a Catholic, or whatever the
locally unpopular religion happened to be. By noon, this would be all
over Penn-Jersey-York; coming on top of Slade Gardner's accusations--

       *       *       *       *       *

He ran up the spiral escalator, stumbling and regaining his footing as
he left it. Bayne and his striking Literates were all gone; he saw a
sergeant of Pelton's store police and went toward him, taking his
spare identity-badge from his pocket.

"Here," he said, handing it to the sergeant. "Get another officer, and
go down to Pelton's office. Show it to Miss Pelton, and tell her I
sent you. There's been an attempt on Chester Pelton's life; you're to
stay with him. Use your own judgment, but don't let anybody, and that
definitely includes Russell Latterman, get at him. If you see anything
suspicious, shoot first and ask questions afterwards. What's your
name, sergeant?"

"Coccozello, sir. Guido Coccozello."

"All right. There'll be a medic or a pharmacist--a Literate,
anyhow--with medicine for Mr. Pelton. He'll ask for you, by name, and
mention me. And there'll be another Literate, maybe; he'll know your
name, and use mine. Hurry, now, sergeant."

He jumped into his 'copter, pulled forward the plexiglass canopy, and
took off vertically to ten thousand feet, then, orienting himself,
swooped downward toward a landing stage on the other side of the East
River, cutting across traffic levels with an utter contempt for
regulations.

The building on which he landed was one of the principal pharmacies;
he spiraled down on the escalator to the main floor and went directly
to the Literate in charge, noticing that he wore on his Sam Browne not
only the badges of retail-merchandising, pharmacist and graduate
chemist but also that of medic-in-training. Snatching a pad and pencil
from a counter, he wrote hastily: _Your private office, at once;
urgent and important._

Looking at it, the Literate nodded in recognition of Cardon's
Literacy.

"Over this way, sir," he said, guiding Cardon to his small cubicle
office.

"Here." Cardon gave him the prescription. "Nitrocaine bulbs. They're
for Chester Pelton; he's had a serious heart attack. He needs these
with all speed. I don't suppose I need tell you how many kinds of hell
will break loose if he dies now and the Fraternities are accused, as
the Illiterates' Organization will be sure to, of having had him
poisoned."

"Who are you?" the Literate asked, taking the prescription and
glancing at it. "That,"--he gestured toward Cardon's silver-laced
black Mexican jacket--"isn't exactly a white smock."

Cardon had his pocket recorder in his hand. He held it out, pressing a
concealed stud; the stylus-and-tablet insignia glowed redly on it for
a moment, then vanished. The uniformed Literate nodded.

"Fill this exactly; better do it yourself, to make sure, and take it
over to Pelton's yourself. I see you have a medic-trainee's badge. Ask
for Sergeant Coccozello, and tell him Frank Cardon sent you." The
Literate, who had not recognized him before, opened his eyes at the
name and whistled softly. "And fix up a sedative to keep him quiet
for not less than four nor more than six hours. Let me use your
visiphone for a while, if you please."

The man in the Literate smock nodded and hurried out. Cardon dialed
William R. Lancedale's private number. When Lancedale's thin, intense
face appeared on the screen, he reported swiftly.

"The way I estimate it," he finished, "Latterman put Bayne up to
making a pass at the girl, after having thrown out Pelton's nitrocaine
bulbs. Probably told the silly jerk that Claire was pining away with
secret passion for him, or something. Maybe he wanted to kill Pelton;
maybe he just wanted this to happen."

"I assume there's no chance of stopping a leak?"

Cardon laughed with mirthless harshness. "That, I take it, was
rhetorical."

"Yes, of course." Lancedale's face assumed the blank expression that
went with a pause for semantic re-integration. "Can you cover yourself
for about an hour?"

"Certainly. 'Copter trouble. Visits to campaign headquarters. An
appeal on Pelton's behalf for a new crew of Literates for the store--"

"Good enough. Come over. I think I can see a way to turn this to
advantage. I'm going to call for an emergency session of the Grand
Council this afternoon, and I'll want you sitting in on it; I want to
talk to you about plans now." He considered for a moment. "There's
too much of a crowd at O'Reilly's, now; come the church way."

Breaking the connection, Cardon dialed again. A girl's face, over a
Literate Third Class smock, appeared in the screen; a lovely golden
voice chimed at him:

"Mineola High School; good morning, sir."

"Good morning. Frank Cardon here. Let me talk, at once, to your
principal, Literate First Class Prestonby."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ralph Prestonby cleared his throat, slipped a master disk into the
recording machine beside his desk, and pressed the start button.

"Dear Parent or Guardian," he began. "Your daughter, now a third-year
student at this school, has reached the age of eligibility for the
Domestic Science course entitled, 'How To Win and Hold a Husband.'
Statistics show that girls who have completed this valuable course are
sooner, longer, and happier married than those who have not enjoyed
its advantages. We recommend it most highly.

"However, because of the delicate nature of some of the visual
material used, your consent is required. You can attach such consent
to this disk by running it for at least ten seconds after the sign-off
and then switching from 'Play' to 'Transcribe.' Kindly include your
full name, as well as your daughter's, and place your thumbprint on
the opposite side of the disk. Very sincerely yours, Literate First
Class Ralph C. Prestonby, Principal."

He put the master disk in an envelope, checked over a list of names
and addresses of parents and girl students, and put that in also. He
looked over the winter sports schedule, and signed and thumbprinted
it. Then he loaded the recorder with his morning's mail, switched to
"Play," and started it. As he listened, he blew smoke rings across the
room and toyed with a dagger, made from a file, which had been thrown
down the central light-well at him a few days before. The invention of
the pocket recorder, which put a half-hour's conversation on a
half-inch disk, had done more to slow down business and promote inane
correspondence than anything since the earlier inventions of
shorthand, typewriters and pretty stenographers. Finally, he cleared
the machine, dumping the whole mess into a basket and carrying it out
to his secretary.

"Miss Collins, take this infernal rubbish and have a couple of the
girls divide it between them, play it off, and make a digest of it,"
he said. "And here. The sports schedule, and this parental-consent
thing on the husband-trapping course. Have them taken care of."

"This stuff," Martha Collins said, poking at the pile of letter disks.
"I suppose about half of it is threats, abuse and obscenities, and the
other half is from long-winded bores with idiotic suggestions and
ill-natured gripes. I'll use that old tag line, again--'hoping you
appreciate our brevity as much as we enjoyed yours--'"

"Yes. That'll be all right." He looked at his watch. "I'm going to
make a personal building-tour, instead of using the TV. The animals
are sort of restless, today. The election; the infantile compulsion to
take sides. If you need me for anything urgent, don't use oral call.
Just flash my signal, red-blue-red-blue, on the hall and classroom
screens. Oh, Doug!"

Yetsko, his length of rubber hose under his arm, ambled out of
Prestonby's private office, stopping to stub out his cigarette. The
action reminded Prestonby that he still had his pipe in his mouth; he
knocked it out and pocketed it. Together, they went into the hall
outside.

"Where to, first, captain?" Yetsko wanted to know.

"Cloak-and-Dagger Department, on the top floor. Then we'll drop down
to the shops, and then up through Domestic Science and Business and
General Arts."

"And back here. We hope," Yetsko finished.

       *       *       *       *       *

They took a service elevator to the top floor, emerging into a
stockroom piled with boxes and crates and cases of sound records and
cans of film and stacks of picture cards, and all the other
impedimenta of Illiterate education. Passing through it to the other
end, Prestonby unlocked a door, and they went down a short hall, to
where ten or fifteen boys and girls had just gotten off a helical
escalator and were queued up at a door at the other end. There were
two Literate guards in black leather, and a student-monitor, with his
white belt and rubber truncheon, outside the door.

Prestonby swore under his breath. He'd hoped they'd miss this, but
since they hadn't, there was nothing for it but to fall in at the tail
of the queue. One by one, the boys and girls went up, spoke briefly to
the guards and the student-monitor, and were passed through the door,
Each time, one of the guards had to open it with a key. Finally, it
was Prestonby's turn.

"B, D, F, H, J, L, N, P, R, T, V, X, Y," he recited to the guardians
of the door.

"A, C, E, G, I, K, M, O, Q, S, U, W, Y," the monitor replied solemnly.
"The inkwell is dry, and the book is dusty."

"But tomorrow, there will be writing and reading for all," Prestonby
answered.

The guard with the key unlocked the door, and he and Yetsko went
through, into an utterly silent sound-proofed room, and from it into
an inner, noisy, room, where a recorded voice was chanting:

"Hat--_huh-ah-tuh._ H-a-t. Box--_buh-oh-ksss_. B-o-x.
Gun--_guh-uh-nnn_. G-u-n. Girl--_guh-ih-rrr-lll_," while pictures were
flashed on a screen at the front, and words appeared under them.

There were about twenty boys and girls, of the freshman-year
age-bracket at desk-seats, facing the screen. They'd started learning
the alphabet when school had opened in September; now they had gotten
as far as combining letters into simple words. In another month,
they'd be as far as diphthongs and would be initiated into the
mysteries of silent letters. Maybe sooner than that; he was finding
that children who had not been taught to read until their twelfth year
learned much more rapidly than the primary grade children in the
Literate schools.

What he was doing here wasn't exactly illegal. It wasn't even against
the strict letter of Fraternity regulations. But it had to be done
clandestinely. What he'd have liked to have done would have been to
have given every boy and girl in English I the same instruction this
selected group was getting, but that would have been out of the
question. The public would never have stood for it; the police would
have had to intervene to prevent a riotous mob of Illiterates from
tearing the school down brick by brick, and even if that didn't
happen, the ensuing uproar inside the Fraternity would have blown the
roof off Literates' Hall. Even Lancedale couldn't have survived such
an explosion, and the body of Literate First Class Ralph N. Prestonby
would have been found in a vacant lot the next morning. Even many of
Lancedale's supporters would have turned on him in anger at this
sudden blow to the Fraternities' monopoly of the printed Word.

So it had to be kept secret, and since adolescents in possession of a
secret are under constant temptation to hint mysteriously in the
presence of outsiders, this hocus-pocus of ritual and password and
countersign had to be resorted to. He'd been in conspiratorial work of
other kinds, and knew that there was a sound psychological basis for
most of what seemed, at first glance, to be mere melodramatic
claptrap.

He and Yetsko passed on through a door across the room, into another
sound-proofed room. The work of soundproofing and partitioning the old
stockroom had been done in the last semester of his first year at
Mineola High, by members of the graduating class of building-trades
students, who had then gone their several ways convinced that they had
been working on a set of music-class practice rooms. The Board of
Education had never even found out about it. In this second room, a
Literate teacher, one of the Lancedale faction, had a reading class of
twenty-five or thirty. A girl was on her feet, with a book in her
hand, reading from it:

    "We are not sure of sorrow;
      And joy was never sure;
    Today will die tomorrow;
      Time stoops to no man's lure;
    And love, grown faint and fretful
    With lips but half regretful
    Sighs, and with eyes forgetful
      Weeps that no loves endure."

Then she handed the book--it was the only copy--to the boy sitting in
front of her, and he rose to read the next verse. Prestonby, catching
the teacher's eye, nodded and smiled. This was a third-year class, of
course, but from h-a-t spells hat to Swinburne in three years was good
work.

There were three other classes, a total of little over a hundred
students. There was no trouble; they were there for one purpose
only--to learn. He spoke with one of the teachers, whose class was
busy with a written exercise; he talked for a while to another whose
only duty at the moment was to answer questions and furnish help to a
small class who were reading silently from a variety of smuggled-in
volumes.

"Only a hundred and twenty, out of five thousand," Yetsko said to him,
as they were dropping down in the elevator by which they had come.
"Think you'll ever really get anything done with them?"

"I won't. Maybe they won't," he replied. "But the ones they'll teach
will. They're just a cadre; it'll take fifty years before the effects
are really felt. But some day--"

The shops--a good half of the school was trades-training--were noisy
and busy. Here Prestonby kept his hand on his gas-projector, and
Yetsko had his rubber hose ready, either to strike or to discard in
favor of his pistol. The instructors were similarly on the alert and
ready for trouble--he had seen penitentiaries where the guards took it
easier. Carpentry and building trades. Machine shop. Welding. 'Copter
and TV repair shops--he made a minor and relatively honest graft
there, from the sale of rebuilt equipment. Even an atomic-equipment
shop, though there was nothing in the place that would excite a Geiger
more than the instructor's luminous-dial watch.

Domestic Science--Home Decorating, Home Handicrafts, Use of Home
Appliances, Beautician School, Charm School. He and Yetsko sampled the
products of the Cooking School, intended for the cafeteria, and found
them edible if uninspired.

Business--classes in recording letters, using Illiterate
business-machines, preparing Illiterate cards for same, filing
recordings--always with the counsel, "When in doubt, consult a
Literate."

General Arts--Spanish and French, from elaborate record players, the
progeny of the old Twentieth Century Linguaphone. English, with
recorded-speech composition, enunciation training, semantics, and what
Prestonby called English Illiterature. The class he visited was
drowsing through one of the less colorful sections of "Gone With The
Wind." World History, with half the students frankly asleep through an
audio-visual on the Feudal System, with planted hints on how nice a
revival of same would be, and identifying the clergy of the Middle
Ages with the Fraternities of Literates. American History, with the
class wide awake, since Custer's Massacre was obviously only moments
away.

"Wantta bet one of those little cherubs doesn't try to scalp another
before the day's out?" Yetsko whispered.

Prestonby shook his head. "No bet. Remember that film on the Spanish
Inquisition, that we had to discontinue?"

It was then that the light on the classroom screen, which had been
flickering green and white, suddenly began flashing Prestonby's
wanted-at-office signal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Prestonby found Frank Cardon looking out of the screen in his private
office. The round, ordinarily cheerful, face was serious, but the
innocent blue eyes were as unreadable as ever. He was wearing one of
the new Mexican _charro_-style jackets, black laced with silver.

"I can't see all your office, Ralph," he said as Prestonby approached.
"Are you alone?"

"Doug Yetsko's all," Prestonby said, and, as Cardon hesitated, added:
"Don't be silly, Frank; he's my bodyguard. What could I be in that he
wouldn't know all about?"

Cardon nodded. "Well, we're in a jam up to here." A handwave conveyed
the impression that the sea of troubles had risen to his chin. He
spoke at some length, describing the fight between Chester Pelton and
Stephen S. Bayne, the Literate strike at Pelton's Purchasers'
Paradise, Pelton's heart attack, and the circumstances of Claire's
opening the safe. "So you see," he finished. "Maybe Latterman tried to
kill Pelton, maybe he just tried to do what he did. I can't take
chances either way."

Prestonby thought furiously. "You say Claire's alone at the store with
her father?"

"And a couple of store cops, sterling characters with the hearts of
lions and the brains of goldfish," Cardon replied. "And Russ
Latterman, and maybe four or five Conservative goons he's managed to
infiltrate into the store."

Prestonby was still thinking, aloud, now. "Maybe they did mean to kill
Pelton; in that case, they'll try again. Or maybe they only wanted to
expose Claire's literacy. It's hard to say what else they'd try--maybe
kidnap her, to truth-drug her and use her as a guest-artist on a
Conservative telecast. I'm going over to the store, now."

"That's a good idea, Ralph. If you hadn't thought of it, I was going
to suggest it. Land on the central stage, ask for Sergeant Coccozello
of the store police, and give my name. Even aside from everything
else, it'd be a good idea to have somebody there who can read and
dares admit it, till a new crew of Literates can get there. You were
speaking about the possibility of kidnaping; how about the boy? Ray?"

Prestonby nodded. "I'll have him come here to my office, and stay
there till I get back; I'll have Yetsko stay with him." He turned to
where the big man in black leather stood guard at the door. "Doug, go
get Ray Pelton and bring him here. Check with Miss Collins for where
he'd be, now." He turned back to the screen. "Anything else, Frank?"

"Isn't that enough?" the brewer-Literate demanded. "I'll call you at
the store, after a while. 'Bye."

The screen darkened as Cardon broke the connection. Prestonby got to
his feet, went to his desk, and picked up a pipe, digging out the
ashes from the bowl with an ice pick that one of the teachers had
taken from a sixteen-year-old would-be murderer. He checked his tablet
gun, made sure that there was an extra loaded clip in the holster, and
got two more spare clips from the arms locker. Then, to make sure, he
called Pelton's store, talking for a while to the police sergeant
Cardon had mentioned. By the time he was finished, the door opened and
Yetsko ushered Ray Pelton in.

"What's happened?" the boy asked. "Doug told me that the Senator ...
my father ... had another heart attack."

"Yes, Ray. I don't believe he's in any great danger. He's at the
store, resting in his office." He went on to tell the boy what had
happened, exactly and in full detail. He was only fifteen, but
already he had completed the four-year reading course and he could
think a great deal more logically than seventy per cent of the people
who were legally entitled to vote. Ray listened seriously, and proved
Prestonby's confidence justified by nodding.

"Frame-up," he said succinctly. "Stinks like a glue factory of a
put-up job. Something's going to happen to Russ Latterman, one of
these days."

"I think you'd better let Frank Cardon take care of him, Ray,"
Prestonby advised. "I think there are more angles to this than he told
me. Now, I'm going over to the store. Somebody's got to stay with
Claire. I want you to stay here, in this room. If anybody sends you
any message supposed to be from me, just ignore it. It'll be a trap.
If I want to get in touch with you, I'll call you, with vision-image."

"Mean somebody might try to kidnap me, or Claire, to force the Senator
to withdraw, or something?" Ray asked, his eyes widening.

"You catch on quickly, Ray," Prestonby commended him. "Doug, you stay
with Ray till I get back. Don't let him out of your sight for an
instant. At noon, have Miss Collins get lunches for both of you sent
up; if I'm not back by fifteen-hundred, take him to his home, and stay
with him there."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:]

For half an hour, Frank Cardon made a flying tour of
Radical-Socialist borough headquarters. Even at the Manhattan
headquarters, which he visited immediately after his talk with
Prestonby, the news had already gotten out. The atmosphere of
optimistic triumph which had undoubtedly followed Mongery's telecast
and his report on the Trotter Poll, had evaporated. The Literate
clerical help was gathered in a tight knot, obviously a little
worried, and just as obviously enjoying the reaction. In smaller and
constantly changing groups, the volunteers, the paid helpers, the
dirt-squirters, the goon gangs, gathered, talking in worried or
frightened or angry voices. When Cardon entered and was recognized,
there was a concerted movement toward him. His two regular bodyguards,
both on leave from the Literate storm troops, moved quickly to range
themselves on either side of him. With a gesture, he halted the
others.

"Hold it!" he called. "I know what you're worried about. I was there
when it happened, and saw everything."

He paused, to let them assimilate that, and continued: "Now get this, all
of you! Our boss, and--_if he lives_--our next senator, was the victim of
a deliberate murder attempt, by Literate First Class Bayne, who threw out
his supply of nitrocaine bulbs and then goaded him into a heart attack
which, except for his daughter, would have been fatal. Claire Pelton
deserves the deepest gratitude of every Radical-Socialist in the state.
She's a smart girl, and she saved the life of her father and our leader.

"But--she is _not_ a Literate!" he cried loudly. "All she did was
something any of you could have done--something I've done, myself, so
that I won't be locked out of my own safe and have to wait for a
Literate to come and open, it for me. She simply kept her eye on the
Literates who were opening the safe, and learned the combination from
the positions to which they turned the dial. And you believe, on the
strength of that, that she's a Literate? The next thing, you'll be
believing that professional liar of a Slade Gardner. And you call
yourselves politicians!" He fairly gargled obscenities.

Looking around, he caught sight of a pair who seemed something less
than impressed with his account of it. Joe West, thick-armed,
hairy-chested, blue-jowled; Horace Yingling, thin and gangling. They
weren't Radical-Socialist party people; they were from the Political
Action Committee of the Consolidated Illiterates Organization, and
their slogan was simpler and more to the point than Chester
Pelton's--the only good Literate is a dead Literate. He tensed himself
and challenged them directly.

"Joe; Horace. How about you? Satisfied the Pelton girl isn't a
Literate, now?"

Yingling looked at West, and West looked back at him questioningly.
Evidently the _suavitor in modo_ was Yingling's province, and the
_fortior in re_ was West's.

"Yeh, sure, Mr. Cardon," Yingling said dubiously. "Now that you
explain it, we see how it was."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was worse than that in some of the other boroughs. One fanatic,
imagining that Cardon himself was a crypto-Literate, drew a gun.
Cardon's guards disarmed him and beat him senseless. At another
headquarters, some character was circulating about declaring that not
only Claire Pelton but her younger brother, Ray, as well, were
Literates. Cardon's two men hustled him out of the building, and,
after about twenty minutes, returned alone. Cardon hoped that the body
would not be found until after the polls closed, the next day.

Finally, leaving his guards with the 'copter at a public landing
stage, he made his way, by devious routes, to William R. Lancedale's
office, and found Lancedale at his desk, seeming not to have moved
since he had showed his agent out earlier in the day.

"Well, we're in a nice puddle of something-or-other," Cardon greeted
him. "On top of that Gardner telecast, this morning--"

"Guthrie Parham's taking care of that, and everything's going to be
done to ridicule Gardner," Lancedale told him. "And even this business
at the store can be turned to some advantage. Before we're through, we
may gain more votes than we lose for Pelton. And we had an informal
meeting--Joyner for Retail Merchandising, Starke for Grievance
Settlements, and four or five others including myself, to make up a
quorum. We had Bayne in, and heard his story of it, and we got a
report from one of our stoolies in the store. Bayne thought he was
due for a commendation; instead, he got an eat-out. Of course, it was
a fact that Pelton'd hit him, and we can't have Literates punched
around, regardless of provocation. So we voted to fine Pelton ten
million for beating Bayne up, and to award him ten million for losses
resulting from unauthorized withdrawal of Literate services. We
ordered a new crew of Literates to the store, and we exiled Bayne to
Brooklyn, to something called Stillman's Used Copter and Junk Bazaar.
For the next few months, the only thing he'll find that's round and
pinchable will be second-hand tires. But don't be too hard on him; I
think he did us a favor."

"You mean, starting a rift between Pelton and the Consolidated
Illiterates' Organization, which we can widen after the election?"

"No. I hadn't thought of it that way, Frank," Lancedale smiled. "It's
an idea worth keeping in mind, and we'll exploit it, later. What I was
thinking about was the more immediate problem of the election--"

The buzzer on Lancedale's desk interrupted, and a voice came out of
the commo box:

"Message, urgent and private, sir. Source named as Sforza."

Cardon recognized the name. Maybe the Independent-Conservatives have
troubles, too, he thought hopefully. Then Lancedale's video screen
became the frame for an almost unbelievably commonplace set of
features.

"Sforza, sir," the man in the screen said. "Sorry I'm late, but I was
able to get out of the building only a few minutes ago, and I had to
make sure I wasn't wearing a tail. I have two new facts. First, the
Conservatives have been bringing storm troops in from outside, from
Philadelphia, and from Wilkes-Scranton, and from Buffalo. They are
being concentrated in lower Manhattan, in plain clothes, with only
concealed weapons, and carrying their hoods folded up under their
coats. Second, I overheard a few snatches of conversation between two
of the Conservative storm troop leaders, as follows: '... Start it in
China ... thirteen-thirty,' and '... Important to make it appear
either spontaneous or planned for business motives.'"

"Try to get us more information, as quickly as possible," Lancedale
directed. "Obviously, we should know, by about thirteen hundred,
what's being planned."

"Right, sir." Lancedale's spy at Independent-Conservative headquarters
nodded and vanished from the screen.

"What does it sound like to you, Frank?" Lancedale asked.

"China is obviously a code-designation for some place in downtown
Manhattan, where the Conservative goon gangs are being concentrated.
The only thing I can say is that it probably is not Chinatown. They'd
either say 'Chinatown' and not 'China,' or they would use some
code-designation that wasn't so close to the actual name," Cardon
considered. "What they're going to start, at thirteen-thirty, which is
only two hours and a half from now, is probably some kind of a riot."

"A riot which could arise from business motives," Lancedale added.
"That sounds like the docks, or the wholesale district, or the garment
district, or something like that." He passed his hand rapidly over the
photoelectric eye of the commo box. "Get me Major Slater," he said;
and, a little later, "Major, get a platoon out to Long Island, to
Chester Pelton's home; have the place searched for possible booby
traps, and maintain guard there till further notice. You'll have no
trouble with the servants, they're all in our pay. That platoon must
not, repeat not, wear uniform or appear to have any connection with
the Fraternities. Put another platoon in Pelton's store. Concealed
weapons, and plain clothes. They should carry their leather helmets in
shopping bags, and roam about in the store, ostensibly shopping. And a
full company, uniformed and armed with heavy weapons, alerted and
ready for immediate 'copter movement." He went on to explain about the
intelligence report and the conclusions drawn from it. The guards
officer repeated back his instructions, and Lancedale broke the
connection.

"Now, Frank," he said, "I told you that this revelation of Claire
Pelton's Literacy can be turned to our advantage. There's to be a full
Council meeting at thirteen hundred. Here's what I estimate Joyner and
Graves will try to do, and here's what I'm going to do to counter
it--"

       *       *       *       *       *

A couple of men in the maroon uniform of Pelton's store police were
waiting as Prestonby's 'copter landed on the top stage; one of them
touched his cap-visor with his gas-billy in salute and said: "Literate
Prestonby? Miss Pelton is expecting you; she's in her father's office.
This way, if you please, sir."

He had hoped to find her alone, but when he entered the office, he saw
five or six of the store personnel with her. Since opening her
father's safe, she had evidently dropped all pretense of Illiteracy;
there was a mass of papers spread on the big desk, and she was
referring from one to another of them with the deft skill of a regular
Fraternities Literate, while the others watched in fascinated horror.

"Wait a moment, Mr. Hutschnecker," she told the white-haired man in
the blue and orange business suit with whom she had been talking, and
laid the printed price-schedule down, advancing to meet him.

"Ralph!" she greeted him. "Frank Cardon told me you were coming. I--"

For a moment, he thought of the afternoon, over two years ago, when
she had entered his office at the school, and he had recognized her as
the older sister of young Ray Pelton.

"Professor Prestonby," she had begun, accusingly, "you have been
teaching my brother, Raymond Pelton, to read!"

He had been prepared for that; had known that sooner or later there
would be some minor leak in the security screen around the classrooms
on the top floor.

"My dear Miss Pelton," he had protested pleasantly. "I think you've
become overwrought over nothing. This pretense to Literacy is a phase
most boys of Ray's age pass through; they do it just as they play
air-pirates or hi-jackers a few years earlier. The usual trick is to
memorize something heard from a record disk, and then pretend to read
it from print."

"Don't try to kid me, professor. I know that Ray can read. I can prove
it."

"And supposing he has learned a few words," he had parried. "Can you
be sure I taught him? And if so, what had you thought of doing about
it? Are you going to expose me as a corrupter of youth?"

"Not unless I have to," she had replied coolly. "I'm going to
blackmail you, professor. I want you to teach me to read, too."

Now, with this gang of her father's Illiterate store officials
present, a quick handclasp and a glance were all they could exchange.

"How is he, Claire?" he asked.

"Out of danger, for the present. There was a medic here, who left just
before you arrived. He brought nitrocaine bulbs, and gave father
something to make him sleep. He's lying down, back in his rest room."
She led him to a door at the rear of the office and motioned him to
enter, following him. "He's going to sleep for a couple of hours,
yet."

The room was a sort of bedroom and dressing room, with a miniscule
toilet and shower beyond. Pelton was lying on his back, sleeping; his
face was pale, but he was breathing easily and regularly. Two of the
store policemen, a sergeant and a patrolman, were playing cards on the
little table, and the patrolman had a burp gun within reach.

"All right, sergeant," Claire said. "You and Gorman go out to the
office. Call me if anything comes up that needs my attention, in the
next few minutes."

The sergeant started to protest. Claire cut him off.

"There's no danger here. This Literate can be trusted; he's a friend
of Mr. Cardon's. Works at the brewery. It's all right."

The two rose and went out, leaving the door barely ajar. Prestonby and
Claire, like a pair of marionettes on the same set of strings, cast a
quick glance at the door and then were in each other's arms. Chester
Pelton slept placidly as they kissed and whispered endearments.

It was Claire who terminated the embrace, looking apprehensively at
her slumbering father.

"Ralph, what's it all about?" she asked. "I didn't even know that you
and Frank Cardon knew each other, let alone that he had any idea about
us."

Prestonby thought furiously, trying to find a safe path through the
tangle of Claire Pelton's conflicting loyalties, trying to find a path
between his own loyalties and his love for her, wondering how much it
would be safe to tell her.

"And Cardon's gone completely cloak-and-dagger-happy," she continued.
"He's talking about plots against my father's life, and against me,
and--"

"A lot of things are going on under cloaks, around here," he told her.
"And under Literate smocks, and under other kinds of costume. And a
lot of daggers are out, too. You didn't know Frank Cardon was a
Literate, did you?"

Her eyes widened. "I thought I was Literate enough to spot Literacy in
anybody else," she said. "No, I never even suspected--"

Somebody rapped on the door. "Miss Pelton," the sergeant's voice
called. "Visiphone call from Literates' Hall."

Prestonby smiled. "I'll take it, if you don't mind," he said. "I'm
acting-chief-Literate here, now, I suppose."

She followed him as he went out into Pelton's office. When he snapped
on the screen, a young man in a white smock, with the Fraternities
Executive Section badge, looked out of it. He gave a slight start when
he saw Prestonby.

"Literate First Class Ralph N. Prestonby, acting voluntarily for
Pelton's Purchasers' Paradise during emergency," he said.

"Literate First Class Armandez, Executive Section," the man in the
screen replied. "This call is in connection with the recent attack of
Chester Pelton upon Literate First Class Bayne."

"Continue, understanding that we admit nothing," Prestonby told him.

"An extemporary session of the Council has found Pelton guilty of
assaulting Literate Bayne, and has fined him ten million dollars,"
Armandez announced.

"We enter protest," Prestonby replied automatically.

"Wait a moment, Literate. The Council has also awarded Pelton's
Purchasers' Paradise damages to the extent of ten million dollars, for
losses incurred by suspension of Literate service, and voted censure
against Literate Bayne for ordering said suspension without consent of
the Council. Furthermore, a new crew of Literates, with their novices,
guards, et cetera, is being sent at once to your store. Obviously,
neither the Fraternities, nor Pelton's, nor the public, would be
benefitted by returning Literate Bayne or any of his crew; he has been
given another assignment."

"Thank you. And when can we expect this new crew of Literates?"
Prestonby asked.

The man in the screen consulted his watch. "Probably inside of an
hour. We've had to do some re-shuffling; you know how these things are
handled. And if you'll pardon me, Literate; just what are you doing at
Pelton's? I understood that you were principal of Mineola High
School."

"That's a good question." Prestonby hastily assessed the circumstances
and their implications. "I'd suggest that you ask it of my superior,
Literate Lancedale, however."

The Literate in the screen blinked; that was the equivalent, for him,
of anybody else's jaw dropping to his midriff.

"Well! A pleasure, Literate. Good day."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Miss Pelton!" The man in the blue-and-orange suit was still trying to
catch her attention. "Where are we going to put that stuff? Russ
Latterman's out in the store, somewhere, and I can't get in touch with
him."

"What did you say it was?" she replied.

"Fireworks, for the Peace Day trade. We want to get it on sale about
the middle of the month."

"This was a fine time to deliver them. Peace Day isn't till the Tenth
of December. Put them down in the fireproof vault."

"That place is full of photographic film, and sporting ammunition, and
other merchandise; stuff we'll have to draw out to replace stock on
the shelves during the sale," the Illiterate objected.

"The weather forecast for the next couple of days is fair," Prestonby
reminded her. "Why not just pile the stuff on the top stage, beyond
the control tower, and put up warning signs?"

The man--Hutschnecker, Prestonby remembered hearing Claire call
him--nodded.

"That might be all right. We could cover the cases with tarpaulins."

A buzzer drew one of the Illiterates to a handphone. He listened for a
moment, and turned.

"Hey, there's a Mrs. H. Armytage Zydanowycz down in Furs; she wants to
buy one of those mutated-mink coats, and she's only got half a million
bucks with her. How's her credit?"

Claire handed Prestonby a black-bound book. "Confidential
credit-rating guide; look her up for us," she said.

Another buzzer rasped, before Prestonby could find the entry on
Zydanowycz, H. Armytage; the Illiterate office worker, laying down one
phone, grabbed up another.

"They're all outta small money in Notions; every son and his brother's
been in there in the last hour to buy a pair of dollar shoestrings
with a grand-note."

"I'll take care of that," Hutschnecker said. "Wait till I call control
tower, and tell them about the fireworks."

"How much does Mrs. H. Armytage Zydanowycz want credit for?" Prestonby
asked. "The book says her husband's good for up to fifteen million, or
fifty million in thirty days."

"Those coats are only five million," Claire said. "Let her have it; be
sure to get her thumbprint, though, and send it up here for
comparison."

"Oh, Claire; do you know how we're going to handle this new Literate
crew, when they get here?"

"Yes, here's the TO for Literate service." She tossed a big chart
across the desk to him. "I made a few notes on it; you can give it to
whoever is in charge."

       *       *       *       *       *

It went on, like that, for the next hour. When the new Literate crew
arrived, Prestonby was delighted to find a friend, and a
fellow-follower of Lancedale, in charge. Considering that Retail
Merchandising was Wilton Joyner's section, that was a good omen.
Lancedale must have succeeded to an extraordinary degree in imposing
his will on the Grand Council. Prestonby found, however, that he
would need some time to brief the new chief Literate on the
operational details at the store. He was unwilling to bring Claire too
prominently into the conference, although he realized that it would be
a matter of half an hour, at the outside, before every one of the new
Literate crew would have heard about her Literate ability. If she'd
only played dumb, after opening that safe--

Finally, by 1300, the new Literates had taken over, and the sale was
running smoothly again. Latterman was somewhere out in the store,
helping them; Claire had lunch for herself and Prestonby sent up from
the restaurant, and for a while they ate in silence, broken by
occasional spatters of small-talk. Then she returned to the question
she had raised and he had not yet answered.

"You say Frank Cardon's a Literate?" she asked. "Then what's he doing
managing the Senator's campaign? Fifth-columning?"

He shook his head. "You think the Fraternities are a solid,
monolithic, organization; everybody agreed on aims and means, and
working together in harmony? That's how it's supposed to look, from
the outside. On the inside, though, there's a bitter struggle going on
between two factions, over policy and for control. One faction wants
to maintain the _status quo_--a handful of Literates doing the reading
and writing for an Illiterate public, and holding a monopoly on
Literacy. They're headed by two men, Wilton Joyner and Harvey Graves.
Bayne was one of that faction."

He paused, thinking quickly. If Lancedale had gotten the upper hand,
there was likely to be a revision of the Joyner-Graves attitude toward
Pelton. In that case, the less he said to incriminate Russell
Latterman, the better. Let Bayne be the villain, for a while, he
decided.

"Bayne," he continued, "is one of a small minority of fanatics who
make a religion of Literacy. I believe he disposed of your father's
medicine, and then deliberately goaded him into a rage to bring on a
heart attack. That doesn't represent Joyner-Graves policy; it was just
something he did on his own. He's probably been disciplined for it, by
now. But the Joyner-Graves faction are working for your father's
defeat and the re-election of Grant Hamilton.

"The other faction is headed by a man you've probably never heard of,
William R. Lancedale. I'm of his faction, and so is Frank Cardon. We
want to see your father elected, because the socialization of Literacy
would eventually put the Literates in complete control of the
government. We also want to see Literacy become widespread, eventually
universal, just as it was before World War IV."

"But Wouldn't that mean the end of the Fraternities?" Claire asked.

"That's what Joyner and Graves say. We don't believe so. And suppose
it did? Lancedale says, if we're so incompetent that we have to keep
the rest of the world in ignorance to earn a living, the world's
better off without us. He says that every oligarchy carries in it the
seeds of its own destruction; that if we can't evolve with the rest of
the world, we're doomed in any case. That's why we want to elect your
father. If he can get his socialized Literacy program adopted, we'll
be in a position to load the public with so many controls and
restrictions and formalities that even the most bigoted Illiterate
will want to learn to read. Lancedale says, a private monopoly like
ours is bad, but a government monopoly is intolerable, and the only
way the public can get rid of it would be by becoming Literates,
themselves."

She glanced toward the door of Pelton's private rest room.

"Poor Senator!" she said softly. "He hates Literacy so, and his own
children are Literates, and his program against Literacy is being
twisted against itself!"

"But you agree that we're right and he's wrong?" Prestonby asked. "You
must, or you'd never have come to me to learn to read."

"He's such a good father. I'd hate to see him hurt," she said. "But,
Ralph, you're my man. Anything you're for, I'm for, and anything
you're against, I'm against."

He caught her hand, across the table, forgetful of the others in the
office.

"Claire, now that everybody knows--" he began.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Top emergency! Top emergency!_" a voice brayed out of the alarm box
on the wall. "_Serious disorder in Department Thirty-two! Serious
disorder in Department Thirty-two!_"

The voice broke off as suddenly as it had begun, but the box was not
silent. From it came a medley of shouts, curses, feminine screams and
splintering crashes. Prestonby and Claire were on their feet.

"You have wall screens?" he asked. "How do they work? Like the ones at
school?"

Claire twisted a knob until the number 32 appeared on a dial, and
pressed a button. On the screen, the Chinaware Department on the third
floor came to life in full sound and color. The pickup must have been
across an aisle from the box from whence the alarm had come; they
could see one of Pelton's Illiterate clerks lying unconscious under
it, and the handphone dangling at the end of its cord. The aisles were
full of jostling, screaming women, trampling one another and fighting
frantically to get out, and, among them, groups of three or four men
were gathered back to back. One such group had caught a store
policeman; three were holding him while a fourth smashed vases over
his head, grabbing them from a nearby counter. A pink dinner plate
came skimming up from the crowd, narrowly missing the wired TV pickup.
A moment later, a blue-and-white sugar bowl, thrown with better aim,
came curving at them in the screen. It scored a hit, and brought
darkness, though the bedlam of sound continued.

[Illustration:]

[Illustration:]

Cardon looked at his watch as he entered the Council Chamber at
Literates' Hall, smoothing his smock hastily under his Sam Browne.
He'd made it with very little time to spare, before the doors would be
sealed and the meeting would begin. He'd been all over town, tracking
down that report of Sforza's; he'd even made a quick visit to
Chinatown, on the off chance that "China" had been used in an attempt
at the double concealment of the obvious, but, as he'd expected, he'd
found nothing. The people there hardly knew there was to be an
election. Accustomed for millennia to ideographs read only by experts,
they viewed the current uproar about Literacy with unconcern.

At the door, he deposited his pocket recorder--no sound-recording
device was permitted, except the big audio-visual camera in front,
which made the single permanent record. Going around the room
counterclockwise to the seats of his faction, he encountered two other
Lancedale men: Gerald K. Toppington, of the Technological Section,
thin-faced, sandy-haired, balding; and Franklin R. Chernov, commander
of the local Literates' guards brigade, with his ragged gray mustache,
his horribly scarred face, and his outsize tablet-holster almost as
big as a mail-order catalogue.

"What's Joyner-Graves trying to do to us, Frank?" Chernov rumbled
gutturally.

"It's what we're going to do to them," Cardon replied. "Didn't the
chief tell you?"

Chernov shook his head. "No time. I only got here fifteen minutes ago.
Chasing all over town about that tip from Sforza. Nothing, of course.
Nothing from Sforza, either. The thing must have been planned weeks
ago, whatever it is, and everybody briefed personally, and nothing on
disk or tape about it. But what's going to happen here? Lancedale
going to pull a rabbit out of his hat?"

Cardon explained. Chernov whistled. "Man, that's no rabbit; that's a
full-grown Bengal tiger! I hope it doesn't eat us, by mistake."

Cardon looked around, saw Lancedale in animated argument with a group
of his associates. Some of the others seemed to be sharing Chernov's
fears.

"I have every confidence in the chief," Toppington said. "If his
tigers make a meal off anybody, it'll be--" He nodded in the direction
of the other side of the chamber, where Wilton Joyner, short, bald,
pompous, and Harvey Graves, tall and cadaverous, stood in a
Rosencrantz-Guildenstern attitude, surrounded by half a dozen of their
top associates.

The Council President, Morehead, came out a little door onto the
rostrum and took his seat, pressing a button. The call bell began
clanging slowly. Lancedale, glancing around, saw Cardon and nodded. On
both sides of the chamber, the Literates began taking seats, and
finally the call bell stopped, and Literate President Morehead rapped
with his gavel. The opening formalities were hustled through. The
routine held-over business was rubber-stamped with hasty votes of
approval, even including the decisions of the extemporary meeting of
that morning on the affair at Pelton's. Finally, the presiding officer
rapped again and announced that the meeting was now open for new
business.

At once, Harvey Graves was on his feet.

"Literate President," he began, as soon as the chair had recognized
him, "this is scarcely _new_ business, since it concerns a problem, a
most serious problem, which I and some of my colleagues have brought
to the attention of this Council many times in the past--the problem
of Black Literacy!" He spat out the two words as though they were a
mouthful of poison. "Literate President and fellow Literates, if
anything could destroy our Fraternities, to which we have given our
lives' devotion, it would be the widespread tendency to by-pass the
Fraternities, the practice of Literacy by non-Fraternities people--"

"We've heard all that before, Wilton!" somebody from the Lancedale
side called out. "What do you want to talk about that you haven't
gotten on every record of every meeting for the last thirty years?"

"Why, this Pelton business," Graves snapped back at him. "You know
what I mean. Your own associates are responsible for it!" He turned
back to face the chair, and, with a surprising minimum of invective,
described the scene in which Claire Pelton had demonstrated her
Literacy. "And that's not all, brother Literates," he continued.
"Since then, I've been receiving reports from the Pelton store. Claire
Pelton has been openly doing the work of a Literate; going over the
store's written records, checking inventories, checking the credit
guide, handling the price lists--"

"What's that got to do with Black Literacy?" Gerald Toppington
demanded. "Black Literacy is a term which labels the professional
practice of Literacy, for hire, by a non-Fraternity Literate, or
Literate service furnished for criminal or politically subversive
purposes, or the betrayal of a client by a Fraternity Literate.
There's nothing of the sort involved here. This girl, who does appear
to be Literate, is simply looking after the interests of her family's
business."

"She was taught by a Literate, a Fraternities-member, under, to say
the very least, irregular circumstances, and without payment of any
fee. Any fee, that is, that the Fraternities can collect any
percentage on. And the Literate who taught her also taught her younger
brother, Ray Pelton, and this Literate, who is known to be her
lover--"

"Suppose he is her lover, so what?" one of Lancedale's partisans
demanded. "You say, yourself, that she's a Literate. That ought to
remove any objection. Why, if she were to come forward and admit and
demonstrate her Literacy, there'd be no possible objection from the
Fraternities' viewpoint to her marrying young Prestonby."

"And as for Prestonby's action in teaching Literacy to her and to her
brother," Cardon spoke up, "I think he deserves the thanks and
commendation of the Fraternities. He's put a period to four
generations of bigoted Illiterates."

Wilton Joyner was on his feet. "Will Literate Graves yield for a
motion?" he asked. "Thank you, Harvey. Literate President, and brother
Literates: I yield to no man in my abhorrence of Black Literacy, or in
my detestation for the political principles of which Chester Pelton
has made himself the spokesman, but I deny that we should allow the
acts and opinions of the Illiterate parent to sway us in our
consideration of the Literate children. It has come to my notice, as
it has to Literate Graves', that this young woman, Claire Pelton, is
Literate to a degree that would be a credit to any Literate First
Class, and her brother can match his Literacy creditably against that
of any novice in our Fraternities. To show that we respect Literate
ability, wherever we find it; to show that we are not the monopolistic
closed-corporation our enemies accuse us of being; to show that we are
not animated by a vindictive hatred of anything bearing the name of
Pelton--I move, and ask that my motion be presented for seconding,
that Claire Pelton, and her brother, Raymond Pelton, be duly elected,
respectively, to the positions of Literate Third Class and Literate
Novice, as members of the Associated Fraternities of Literates!"

From the Joyner-Graves side, there were dutiful cries of, "Yes! Yes!
Admit the young Peltons!" and also gasps of horrified surprise from
the rank-and-filers who hadn't been briefed on what was coming up.

Lancedale was on his feet in an instant. "Literate President!" he
cried. "In view of the delicate political situation, and in view of
Chester Pelton's violent denunciation of our Fraternities--"

"Literate Lancedale," the President objected. "The motion is not to be
debated until it has been properly seconded."

"What does the Literate President think I'm doing?" Lancedale
retorted. "I second the motion!"

Joyner looked at Lancedale in angry surprise, which gradually became
fearful suspicion. His stooge, who had already risen with a prepared
speech of seconding, simply gaped.

"Furthermore," Lancedale continued, "I move an amendment to Literate
Joyner's motion. I move that the ceremony of the administration of the
Literates' Oath, and the investiture in the smock and insignia, be
carried out as soon as possible, and that an audio-visual recording be
made, and telecast this evening, before twenty-one hundred."

Brigade commander Chernov, prodded by Cardon, jumped to his feet.

"Excellent!" he cried. "I second the motion to amend the motion of
Literate Joyner."

If there were such a thing as a bomb which would explode stunned
silence, Lancedale and Chernov had dropped such a bomb. Cardon could
guess how Joyner and Graves felt; they were now beginning to be afraid
of their own proposition. As for the Lancedale Literates, he knew how
many of them felt. He'd felt the same way, himself, when Lancedale had
proposed the idea. He got to his feet.

"Literate President, brother Literates," he raised his voice. "I call
for an immediate vote on this amended motion, which I, personally,
endorse most heartily, and which I hope to see carried unanimously."

"Now, wait a minute!" Joyner objected. "This motion ought to be
debated--"

"What do you want to debate about it?" Chernov demanded. "You
presented it, didn't you?"

"Well, I wanted to give the Council an opportunity to discuss it, as
typical of our problems in dealing with Black ... I mean,
non-Fraternities ... Literacy--"

"You mean, you didn't know it was loaded!" Cardon told him. "Well,
that's your hard luck; we're going to squeeze the trigger!"

"I withdraw the motion!" Joyner shouted.

"Literate President," Lancedale said gently, his thin face lighting
with an almost saintly smile, "Literate Joyner simply cannot withdraw
his motion, now. It has been properly seconded and placed before the
house, and so has my own humble contribution to it. I demand that the
motion be acted upon."

"Vote! Vote! Vote!" the Lancedale Literates began yelling.

"I call on all my adherents to vote against this motion!" Joyner
shouted.

"Now look here, Wilton!" Harvey Graves shouted, reddening with anger.
"You're just making a fool out of me. This was your idea, in the first
place! Do you want to smash everything we've ever done in the
Fraternities?"

"Harvey, we can't go on with it," Joyner replied. He crossed quickly
to Graves' seat and whispered something.

"For the record," Lancedale said sweetly, "our colleague, Literate
Joyner, has just whispered to Literate Graves that since I have
seconded his motion, he's now afraid of it. I think Literate Graves is
trying to assure him that my support is merely a bluff. For the
information of this body, I want to state categorically that it is
not, and that I will be deeply disappointed if this motion does not
pass."

An elderly Literate on the Joyner-Graves side, an undersized man with
a bald head and a narrow mouth, was on his feet. He looked like an
aged rat brought to bay by a terrier.

"I was against this fool idea from the start!" he yelled. "We've got
to keep the Illiterates down; how are we ever going to do that if we
go making Literates out of them? But you two thought you were being
smart--"

"Shut up and sit down, you old jackass!" one of Joyner's people
shouted at him.

"Shut up, yourself, Ginter," a hatchet-faced woman Literate from the
Finance Section squawked.

Literate President Morehead, an amiable and ineffective maiden aunt in
trousers, pounded frantically with his gavel. "Order!" he fairly
screamed. "This is disgraceful!"

"You can say that again!" Brigade commander Chernov boomed. "What do
you people over on the right think this is; an Illiterates'
Organization Political Action meeting?"

"Vote! Vote!" Cardon bellowed.

Literate President Morehead banged his gavel and, in a last effort,
started the call bell clanging.

"The motion has been presented and seconded; the amendment has been
presented and seconded. It will now be put to a vote!"

"Roll call!" Cardon demanded. Four or five other voices, from both
sides of the chamber, supported him.

"The vote will be by roll call," Literate President Morehead agreed.
"Addison, Walter G."

"Aye!" He was a subordinate of Harvey Graves.

"Agostino, Pedro V."

"Aye!" He was a Lancedale man.

So it went on. Graves voted for the motion. Joyner voted against it.
All the Lancedale faction, now convinced that their leader had the
opposition on the run, voted loudly for it.

"The vote has been one hundred and eighty-three for, seventy-two
against," Literate President Morehead finally announced. "The motion
is herewith declared carried. Literate Lancedale, I appoint you to
organize a committee to implement the said motion, at once."

       *       *       *       *       *

Prestonby flung open the door of the rest room where Sergeant
Coccozello and his subordinate were guarding the unconscious Pelton.

"Sergeant! Who's in charge of store police, now?"

Coccozello looked blank for an instant. "I guess I am," he said.
"Lieutenant Dunbar's off on his vacation, in Mexico, and Captain
Freizer's in the hospital; he was taken sick suddenly last evening."

Probably poisoned, Prestonby thought, making a mental note to find out
which hospital and get in touch with one of the Literate medics there.

"Well, come out here, sergeant, and have a look around the store on
the TV. We have troubles."

Coccozello could hear the noise that was still coming out of the
darkened screen. As he stepped forward, Claire got another pickup,
some distance from the one that had been knocked out. A mob of women
customers were surging away from the Chinaware Department, into
Glassware; they were running into the shopping crowd there, with
considerable disturbance. A couple of store police were trying to get
through the packed mass of humanity, and making slow going of it.
Coccozello swore and started calling on his reserves on one of the
handphones.

"Wait a moment, sergeant," Prestonby stopped him. "Don't commit any of
your reserves down there. We're going to need them to hold the
executive country, up here. This is only the start of a general riot."

"Who are you and what do you know about it?" Coccozello challenged.

"Listen to him, Guido," Claire said. "He knows what he's doing."

"Claire, you have some way of keeping a running count of the number of
customers in and out of the store, haven't you?" Prestonby asked.

"Why, yes; here." She pointed to an indicator on Chester Pelton's
desk, where constantly changing numbers danced.

"And don't you have a continuous check on sales, too? How do they
jibe?"

"They don't; look. Sales are away below any expectation from the
number of customers, even allowing for shopping habits of a
bargain-day crowd. But what's that got to do--"

Prestonby was back at the TV, shifting from pickup to pickup.

"Look, sergeant, Claire. That isn't a normal bargain-day crowd, is it?
Look at those groups of men, three or four to a group, shifting
around, waiting for something to happen. This store's been
infiltrated by a big goon gang. That business in Chinaware's just the
start, to draw our reserves down to the third floor. Look at that,
now."

He had a pickup on the twelfth floor, the floor just under the public
landing stages, and at the foot of the escalators leading to the
central executive block.

"See how they're concentrating, there?" he pointed out. "In that
ladies' wear department, there are three men for every woman, and the
men are all drifting from counter to counter over in the direction of
our escalators."

Coccozello swore again, feelingly. "Literate, you know your stuff!" he
said. "That fuss in China is just a feint; this is where they're
really going to hit. What do you think it is? Macy & Gimbel's trying
to bust up our sale, or politics?"

Prestonby shrugged. "Take your choice. A competitor would concentrate
where your biggest volume of sale was going on, though; political
enemies would try to get up here, and that's what this gang's trying
to do."

"He's absolutely right, Guido," Claire told the sergeant. "Do whatever
he tells you."

Sergeant Coccozello looked at him, awaiting orders.

"We can't commit our reserves in that Chinaware Department fight; we
need them up here. Where are they, now, and how many?"

"Thirteen, counting myself and the man in there." He nodded toward the
room where Chester Pelton lay in drugged sleep. "In the squad room, on
the floor below."

"And for the mob below to get up here?"

"Two escalators, sir, northeast and southwest corners of office
country. And we got some new counters that Mr. Latterman had built,
that didn't get put out in time for the sale. We can use them to build
barricades, if we have to."

"How about a 'copter attack on the roof?"

Coccozello grinned. "I'd like to see that, now, Literate. We got
plenty of A-A equipment up there--four 7-mm machine guns, two 12-mm's,
and one 20-mm auto-cannon. We could hold off the State Guard with
that."

"That isn't saying much, but they're not even that good. So it'll be
the escalators. Think, now, sergeant. Fires, burglary, holdups--"

The sergeant's grin widened. "High-pressure fire hose, one at the head
of each escalator, and a couple more that can be dragged over from
other outlets. Say we put two men on each hose, lying down at the head
of the escalators. And we got plenty of firearms; we can arm some of
these clerks, up here--"

"All right; do that. And put out an emergency call, by
inter-department telephone, not by public address, to floorwalkers
from the fifth floor down, to gather up all male clerks and other
store personnel in their departments, arm them with anything they can
find, and rush them to Chinaware. Tell them to shout 'Pelton!' when
they hit the mob, to avoid breaking each others' heads in the
confusion, and tell them they're expected to hold the Chinaware and
Glassware departments themselves, without any help from the store
police."

"Why not?" Claire wanted to know.

"That's how battles come to happen at the wrong time and place,"
Prestonby told her. "Two small detachments collide, and each sends
back for re-enforcements, and the next thing anybody knows, there's a
full-size battle going on where nobody wants to fight one. We're going
to fight our main battle at the head of the escalators from the
twelfth floor."

"You've done this sort of work before, Literate," Coccozello grinned.
"You talk like a storm-troop captain. What else?"

"Well, so far, we've just been talking defense. We need to take the
offensive, ourselves." He glanced around. "Is there a freight elevator
from this block to the basement?"

"Yeah. Wait till I see." Coccozello went to the TV-screen and dialed.
"Yeah, and the elevator's up here, too," he said.

"Well, you take what men you can spare--a couple of your cops, and a
couple of the office crew--arm them with pistols, carbines, clubs,
whatever you please, and take them down to the basement. Gather up
all the warehouse gang, down there, and arm them. And as soon as you
get to the basement, send the elevator back up here. That's our life
line; we can't risk having it captured. You'll organize flying squads
to go up into the store from the basement. Bust up any trouble that
seems to be getting started, if you can, but your main mission will be
to rescue store police, Literates, Literates' guards, and store help,
and get them back to the basement. They'll be picked up from there and
brought up here on the elevator." He picked up a pad from a desk and
wrote a few lines on it. "Show this to any Literate you meet; get
Literate Hopkinson to countersign it for you, when you find him. Tell
him we want his whole gang up here as soon as possible."

"How about getting help from outside?" Claire asked. "The city police,
or--"

"City police won't lift a finger," Prestonby told her. "They never
help anybody who has a private police force; they have too much to do
protecting John Q. Citizen. Hutschnecker; suppose you call
Radical-Socialist campaign headquarters; tell them to rush some of
their Lone Rangers around here--"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:]

Russell M. Latterman was lunching in the store restaurant, at a table
next the thick glass partition, where he could look out across
Confectionery and Pastries toward the Tobacco Shoppe and the Liquor
Department. There were two ways of looking at it, of course. He was
occupying a table that might have been used by a customer, but, on the
other hand, he was known by sight to many of the customers, and the
fact that he was eating here had some advertising value, and he could
keep his eye on the business going on around him. Off in the distance,
he caught the white flash of a Literate smock at one of the counters;
one of the new crew sent in to replace the ones Bayne had pulled out.
He was glad and at the same time disturbed. He had had his doubts
about staging a Literates' strike, and he was almost positive that
Wilton Joyner had known nothing about it. The whole thing had been
Harvey Graves' idea. There was a serious question of Literate ethics
involved, to say nothing of the effect on the public. The trick of
forcing Claire Pelton to reveal her secret Literacy was all right,
although he wished that it had been Frank Cardon who had opened that
safe. Or did he? Cardon would have brazened it out, claimed to have
memorized the combination after having learned it by observation, and
would probably have gotten away with it. But that silly girl had lost
her head afterward, and had gone on to brand herself, irrevocably, as
a Literate.

One of the waitresses was hurrying toward him, almost falling over
herself in excitement. She began talking when she was ten feet from
the table.

"Mr. Latterman! Mr. Latterman!" she was calling to him. "A terrible
fight, down in Chinaware--!"

"Well, what do we have store police for?" he demanded. "They can take
care of it. Now be quiet, Madge; don't get the customers excited!"

He returned to his lunch, watching, with satisfaction, the crowd that
was packing into the Liquor Department, next to the restaurant. That
special loss-leader, Old Atom-Bomb Rye, had been a good idea. In the
first place, the stuff was fit for nothing but cleaning drains and
removing varnish; if he were Pelton, he would have fired that fool
buyer who got them overstocked on it. But the audio-advertiser,
outside, was reiterating: "_Choice whiskies, two hundred dollars a
sixth and up!_" and pulling in the customers, who, when they
discovered that the two-hundred-dollar bargain was Old Atom-Bomb, were
shelling out five hundred to a grand a sixth for good liquor.

He finished his coffee and got to his feet. Be a good idea to look in
on Liquor, and see how things were going. The department was getting
more and more crowded every minute; three customers were entering for
every one who left.

On the way, he passed two women, and caught a snatch of conversation:

"Don't go down on the third floor, for Heaven's sake ... terrible
fight ... smashing everything up--"

Worried, he continued into Liquor, and the looks of the crowd there
increased his worries. Too many men between twenty and thirty, all
dressed alike, looking alike, talking and acting alike. It looked like
a goon-gang infiltration, and he was beginning to see why Harvey
Graves had wanted the Literates pulled out, and why Joyner, bound by
ethics to do nothing against the commercial interests of Pelton's, had
known nothing about it. He started toward a counter, to speak to a
clerk, but one of the stocky, quietly-dressed young men stepped in
front of him.

"Gimme a bottle of Atom-Bomb," he said. "Don't bother wrapping it."

"Yes, sir." The clerk seemed worried, too. He got the bottle and set
it on the counter. "That'll be two C, sir."

"I see you're wearing a Radical-Socialist button," the customer
commented. "Because you want to, or because Chet Pelton makes you?"

"Mr. Pelton never interferes with his employees' political
convictions," the clerk replied loyally.

Saying nothing, the customer took the bottle, swung it by the neck,
and smashed it over the clerk's head, knocking him senseless.

"That's all that rotgut's good for," the customer said, jumping over
the counter. "All right, boys; help yourselves!"

       *       *       *       *       *

For a surprisingly long time, the riot was localized in China, where
it had begun. Using, alternately, three TV-pickups around the scene of
the disturbance, Prestonby watched its progress, and watched
successive details of store personnel, armed with clubs and a few
knives and sono pistols, hit the riot, shouting their battle cry, and
vanish. They were, of course, lambs of sacrifice, however unlamblike
their conduct. They were buying time, and they were drawing groups of
goons into the action in China and Glassware who might have been
making trouble elsewhere.

There was an outbreak on the sixth floor, in Liquor; Claire, touring
the store on the other TV-screen, spotted it and called his attention
to it. Back of the shattered glass partition, a mob of men were
snatching bottles from the shelves and tossing them out to the crowd.
One of the clerks, in his gray uniform jacket, was lying unconscious
outside. While Prestonby watched, another, and another, came flying
out the doorway. A fourth victim, in ordinary business clothes,
tattered and disheveled, came flying out after them, to land in a
heap, stunned for an instant, and then pick himself up. Prestonby
laughed heartily when he recognized Literate--undercover--First Class
Russell M. Latterman.

"I ought to have anticipated that," he said. "Any time there's a riot,
the liquor stores are the first things looted. The liquor stores, and
the--Claire! See what's going on in Sporting Goods!"

Sporting Goods, between Tools & Hardware and Toys, on the fifth floor,
was swamped. One of the clerks was lying on the floor in a puddle of
blood, past any help; none of the others were in sight. The gun racks
and pistol cases were being cleaned out systematically. This had been
organized in advance. There were four or five men working
industriously wiping grease out of bores and actions before handing
out firearms, and a couple more making sure that the right cartridges
went with each weapon. Somebody had brought a small grinding wheel
over from Tools and plugged it in, and was grinding points on the
foils and épées. Others were collecting baseball bats, golf clubs, and
football helmets and catchers' masks. The Tool Department was being
stripped of everything that could be used as a weapon, too.

The whole store, by this time, was an approximation of Mutiny in a
Madhouse. Dressgoods was being looted by a howling mob of women, who
were pulling bolts of material from shelves and fighting among
themselves over them. Somebody had turned on the electric fans, and
long streams of flimsy fabric were blowing about like a surrealist
maypole dance. Somebody in Household Furnishings had turned on a
couple of fans, too, and a mob of hoodlums were opening cans of paint
and throwing them into the fan blades.

The little Antiques Department, in a corner of the fourth floor back
of the Gift Shoppe, was an island of peace in the general chaos. There
was only one way into it, and one of the clerks, who had gotten
himself into a suit of Fifteenth Century battle armor, was standing in
the entrance, leaning on a two-hand sword. There was blood on the long
blade, and more blood splashed on the floor in front of him. He was
being left entirely alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hutschnecker, called to the telephone, spoke briefly, listened for a
while, spoke again in hearty thanks, and hung up.

"Macy & Gimbel's," he told Prestonby. "They heard about our
trouble--probably one of their price-spotters phoned in about it--and
they're offering to send twenty of their store-cops to help us out.
They'll be landing on our stage in eight minutes, rifles and steel
helmets."

Prestonby nodded. It would have been quite conceivable that Pelton's
chief competitor had started the riot; since they hadn't, their offer
of armed aid was just as characteristic of the bitter but
mutually-respectful rivalries of the commercial world. A few minutes
later, another call came in, this time on the visiphone. Prestonby
took it when he saw a Literates' Guards officer in the screen and
recognized him.

"That you, Prestonby?" the officer, Major Slater, asked in some
surprise. "Didn't know you were at Pelton's. What's going on, there?"

Prestonby told him, briefly.

"Yes; we had some of our people at the store, in plain clothes,"
Slater said. "Just in case of trouble. On Mr. L.'s orders. They
reported a riot starting, but naturally, their reports were
incomplete. Can you get one of your landing stages cleared for us? We
have two hundred men, in twenty 'copters." Then he must have noticed
some of the store Illiterates back of Prestonby, and realized that
this offer of help to Literacy's worst enemy would arouse suspicion.
"Not that we care what happens to Chester Pelton, but we have to
protect our own people at the store."

"Yes, of course," Prestonby agreed. "Come in on our north stage.
You'll probably find a fight going on on our twelfth floor, just
inside. Anybody who's trying to get up the escalators to the office
block will be an enemy."

"Right. We're halfway there now." The Literates' Guards officer broke
the connection.

"You heard that?" he asked, turning to the others in the office. "If
we can hold out till they get here, we're all right. Did you contact
Radical-Socialist headquarters, yet, Hutschnecker?"

"Yes. I talked to a fellow named Yingling. He said that all the party
storm troops had been lured out to some kind of a disturbance in North
Jersey Borough; he'd try to get them recalled."

Prestonby swore bitterly. "By the time his own party-goons get here,
the Literates' Guards and Macy & Gimbel's will have pulled Pelton's
bacon off the fire for him. Nice friends he has!"

An alarm buzzer went off suddenly, and an urgent voice came out of the
box on the wall:

"Here come the goons! South escalator!"

Prestonby grabbed a burp gun and a canvas musette bag full of clips.
By the time he had gotten down to what, in deference to the
superstitions of the Illiterate store force, was known as the
fourteenth floor, an attack on the north escalator had developed as
well. In both cases, the attackers seemed to expect no organized
resistance. They simply jumped onto the escalators, adding their own
running speed, and came rushing up, firing pistols ahead of them at
random.

The defenders, however, had been ready: the fire hoses caught those in
the lead and hurled them back. Some of them vaulted the barrier
between the ascending and descending spirals and let themselves be
carried down again. Less than five minutes after the buzzer had
sounded the warning, the attack stopped. The noise on the twelfth
floor increased, however, and, leaning over into the escalator-way,
Prestonby could see the rioters firing in the direction of the
entrance from the north landing stage. Within a matter of thirty
seconds, they began to flee, and a wave of Literates' Guards, in their
futuristic "space cadet" uniforms, came pouring in after them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Douglass MacArthur Yetsko put the burp gun back together again, tried
the action, and laid it aside with a sigh. He had cleaned every weapon
in his and Prestonby's private arsenal, since lunch, and now he had to
admit the unpalatable fact that there was nothing left to do but turn
on the TV. Ray had been no company at all; the boy hadn't spoken a
word since he'd started rummaging among the captain's books. Gloomily,
he snapped on the screen to sample the soap shows.

Della Pallas was in jail again, this time accused of murdering the
lawyer who had gotten her acquitted on a previous murder rap.
Considering the fact that she had languished in jail for almost a year
during the other trial, Yetsko felt that she had a sound motive.
Rudolf Barstow, in "Broadway Wife," was, like Bruce's spider,
spinning his five hundredth web to ensnare the glamorous Marie
Knobble. And there was a show about a schoolteacher and her class of
angelic little tots that almost brought Yetsko's lunch up.

He shifted the dial again; a young Literate announcer was speaking
quickly, excitedly:

"... Scene of the riot, already the worst this year, and growing
steadily worse. We take you now to downtown Manhattan, where our
portable units and commentators have just arrived, and switch you to
Ed Morgan."

The screen went black, and Yetsko swore angrily. Ray lifted his head
quickly from his book and reached for the sono pistol Yetsko had given
him.

"Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, and just a moment, until we can
give you the picture. We're having what is usually labeled as 'slight
technical difficulties,' in this case the difficulty of avoiding
having a hole shot in our camera or in your commentator's head. Yes,
that's shooting you hear; there, somebody's using an auto rifle! How
are you coming, Steve?"

A voice muttered something which, two centuries ago, would have caused
an earth-shaking scandal in the whole radio-TV industry.

"Well, till Steve gets things fixed up, a brief review, to date, of
what's sure to go down in history as the Battle of Pelton's
Purchasers' Paradise--"

"Huh?" Ray fairly shouted, the book forgotten.

"... Started in the Chinaware Department, as a relatively innocent
brawl, and spread to the Liquor Department, and then, all of a sudden,
everybody started playing rough. At first, it was suspected that Macy
& Gimbel's had sent a goon gang around to break up Pelton's fall sale,
but when the former concern rallied to the assistance of their
competitor with a force of twenty riflemen, that began to look less
likely, and we're beginning to think that it might be the work of some
of Pelton's political enemies. About ten minutes ago, Major James F.
Slater, of the Literates' Guards, arrived with two hundred of his men,
to protect the Literates on duty at the store. They captured the
entire twelfth floor, where we are, now, with the exception of the
Ladies' Lingerie and Hosiery departments around one of the escalators
to the lower floors; here the gang who started the riot, and who are
now donning white hoods to distinguish themselves from the various
other factions involved, have thrown up barricades of counters and
display tables and are fighting bitterly to keep control of the
escalator head. Ah, here we are!"

The screen lit suddenly, and they were looking, Ray over Yetsko's
shoulder, across the devastated expanse of what had been the Ladies'
Frocks department, toward Lingerie and Hosiery, which seemed to have
been thoroughly looted, then stripped of everything that could be used
to build a barricade.

"... Seems to have been quite a number of heavy 'copters just landed
on the east stage, filled with more goons, probably to re-enforce the
gang back of that barricade. The firing's gotten noticeably heavier--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Yetsko had turned from the screen, and was pawing in the arms locker.
For a job like this, he'd need firepower. He took the ten-shot clip
from the butt of his pistol and inserted one with a curling
hundred-shot drum at the bottom, and shoved two more like it into the
pockets of his jacket. And now, something to clear the way with. He
took out a three-foot length of weighted fire hose.

Then he saw Ray. That kid was pinning him down, here, while the
captain was probably fighting for his life! But the captain'd told him
to stay with Ray--He dropped the weighted hose.

"What's the matter, Doug?" the boy asked. "Pick it up and let's get
going."

He shook his head. "Can't. The captain told me I had to take care of
you."

The boy opened his mouth to speak, closed it again, and thought for a
moment. Then he asked:

"Doug, didn't Captain Prestonby tell you to stay with me?"

"Yes--"

"All right. You do just that, because I'm going to help Claire and the
senator. That's who that goon gang's after."

Yetsko considered the proposition for a moment, horrified. Why, this
was the captain's girl's kid brother; if anything happened to him--His
mind refused to contemplate what the captain would do to him.

"No. You gotta stay here, Ray," he said. "The captain--"

Then his eye caught the screen. Ed Morgan must have found a place
where he could run his camera up on an extension rod from behind
something; they were looking down, from almost ceiling height, at the
barricade, and at the Literates' guards who were firing from cover at
it. A sudden blast of automatic-weapons burst from the barricade; more
men in white hoods came boiling up the escalator, and they all rushed
forward. The few Literates' guards skirmishers were overwhelmed. He
saw one of them, a man he knew, Sam Igoe, from Company 5, go down
wounded; he saw one of the white-hooded goons pause to brain him with
a carbine butt before charging on.

"Why, you dirty rotten Illiterate--!" he roared, retrieving his
weighted hose. "Come on, Ray; let's go!"

Ray hesitated, as though in thought. "Ken Dorchin; Harry Cobb; Dick
Hirschfield; Jerry McCarty; Ramon Nogales; Pete Shawne; Tom
Hutchinson--"

"Who--?" Yetsko began. "What've they gotta do with--?"

"We need a gang; the two of us'd last about as long as a pint of beer
at a Dutch picnic." Ray went to the desk, grabbed a pen, and made a
list of names, in a fair imitation of Ralph Prestonby's neat
block-printing. "Give this to the girl outside, and tell her to have
them called for and sent in here," the boy directed. "And see if you
can find us some transport. I think there ought to be a couple of big
'copters finished down at the shops. And if you can find a couple more
Literates' guards you can talk into going with us--"

Yetsko nodded and took the paper without question. He was not, and he
would be the first to admit it, of the thinking type. He was a good
sergeant, but he had to have an officer to tell him what to do. Ray
Pelton might be only fifteen years old, but his sister was the
captain's girl, and that put him in the officer class. A very young
and recently-commissioned second lieutenant, say, but definitely an
officer. Yetsko took the list and looked at it. Like most Literates'
guards, he could read, after a fashion. He recognized the names; the
boys were all members of the top floor secret society. He went out and
gave the list to Martha Collins.

He'd expected some argument with her, but she seemed to accept Ray
Pelton's printing as Prestonby's; she began checking room charts and
class lists, and calling for the boys to be sent at once to the
office. He went out, and down to the 'copter repair shop, where he
found that a big four-ton air truck that the senior class had been
working on for several weeks was finished.

"That thing been tested, yet?" he asked the instructor.

"Yes; I had it up, myself, this morning. Flew it over to the Bronx and
back with a load of supplies."

"O. K. Have somebody you can trust--one of your guards,
preferably--bring it around behind the Administration Wing. Captain
Prestonby wants it. I'm to take some boys from Fourth Year Civics on a
tour. Something about election campaign methods."

The instructor called a Literates' guard and gave him instructions.
Yetsko went to the guards' squad room on the second floor, where he
found half a dozen of the reserves loafing.

"All right; you guys start earning your pay," he said. "We're going to
a party."

The men got to their feet and began gathering their weapons.

"Mason," he continued, "you have your big 'copter here; the gang of
you can all get in it. I'm taking off in a four-ton truck, with some
of these kids. I want you boys to follow us. We're going to Pelton's
store. There's a fight going on there, and the captain's in the middle
of it. We gotta get him out."

They all looked at him in puzzled surprise, but nobody gave him any
argument. Funny, now that he thought of it; it had been quite a long
time since anybody had ever given him any argument about anything. A
couple of guys out in Pittsburgh had tried it, but somehow they'd lost
interest in arguing, after a little--

When he returned to the office and opened the door, a blast of shots
greeted him through the open door of Prestonby's private office. He
had his pistol out before he realized that the shooting was going on
at Pelton's Purchasers' Paradise, ten miles away. Literate Martha
Collins, in the inner room, was fairly screaming: "Shut that infernal
thing off and listen to me!"

The dozen-odd boys whom Ray had recruited for the improvised
relief-expedition were pulling weapons out of the gun locker, pawing
through the boxes on the ammunition shelf, trying to explain to one
another the working of machine carbines and burp guns. Yetsko
shouldered through them and turned down the sound volume of the TV.

"This is absolutely outrageous!" Literate Martha Collins stormed at
him. "You ought to be ashamed of yourself, taking these children to a
murderous battle like that--"

"Well, maybe it ain't right, using savages in a civilized riot,"
Yetsko admitted, "but I don't care. The captain's in a jam, and I'd
use live devils, if I could catch a few." He took a burp gun from one
of the boys, who had opened the action and couldn't get it closed
again. "Here; you kids don't want this kinda stuff," he reproved.
"Sono guns, and sleep-gas guns, that's all right. But these things are
killing tools!"

"It's what we'll have to use, Doug," Ray told him. "Things have been
happening, since you went out. Look at the screen."

Yetsko looked, and swore blisteringly. Then he gave the burp gun back
to the boy.

"Look; you gotta press this little gismo, here, to let the action shut
when there's no clip in, or when the clip's empty. When you got a
loaded clip in, you just pull back on this and let go--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Frank Cardon looked at his watch, and saw that it was 1345, as it had
been ten seconds before, when he had last looked. He started to drum
nervously on his chair arm with his fingers, then caught himself as he
saw Lancedale, who must have been every bit as anxious as himself,
standing outwardly calm and unruffled.

"Well, that's the situation which now confronts us, brother
Literates," the slender, white-haired man was finishing. "You must
see, by now, that the policy of unyielding opposition which some of
you have advocated and pursued is futile. You know the policy I favor,
which now remains the only policy we can follow; it is summed up in
that law of political strategy: If you can't lick 'em, join 'em, and,
after joining, take control.

"In spite of the Radical-Socialist victory in this state at tomorrow's
election, it will not be possible, in the next Congress, to enact
Pelton's socialized Literacy program into law. The Radicals will not be
able to capture enough seats in the lower house, and there are too many
uncontested seats in the Senate now held by Independent-Conservatives.
But, and this is inevitable, barring some unforeseen accident of the
order of a political cataclysm, they will control both houses of
Congress after the election of 2144, two years hence, and we can also be
sure that two years hence Chester Pelton will be nominated and
overwhelmingly elected president of the Consolidated States of North
America. Six months thereafter, the socialized Literacy program will be
the law of the land.

"So, we have until mid-2145 to make our preparations. I would estimate
that, if we do not destroy ourselves by our own folly in the meantime,
we should, two years thereafter, be in complete if secret control of
the whole Consolidated States Government. If any of you question that
last statement, you can merely ask yourselves one question: How, in
the name of all that is rational, can Illiterates control and operate
a system of socialized Literacy? Who but Literates can keep such a
program from disintegrating into complete and indescribable confusion?

"I don't ask for any decision at this time. I do not ask for any
debate at this time. Let each of us consider the situation in his or
her own mind, and let us meet again a week from today to consider our
future course of action, each of us realizing that any decision we
take then will determine forever the fate of our Fraternities." He
looked around the room. "Thank you, brother Literates," he said.

Instantly, Cardon was on his feet with a motion to recess the meeting
until 1300 the following Monday, and Brigade commander Chernov
seconded the motion immediately. As soon as Literate President
Morehead's gavel banged, Cardon, still on his feet, was running for
the double doors at the rear; the two Literates' guards on duty there
got them unsealed and opened by the time he had reached them.

There was another guard in the hall, waiting for him with a little
record-disk.

"From Major Slater; call came in about ten minutes ago," he said.

Cardon snapped the disk into his recorder-reproducer and put in the
ear plug.

"Frank," Slater's voice came out of the small machine. "You'd better
get busy, or you won't have any candidate when the polls open tomorrow.
Just got a call from Pelton's store--place infiltrated by goons,
estimated strength two hundred, presumed Independent-Conservatives.
Serious rioting already going on; I'm taking my reserve company there.
And if you haven't found out, yet, where China is, it's on the third
floor, next to Glassware."

Cardon pulled out the ear plug, stuffed the recorder into his trouser
pocket, and began unbuckling his Sam Browne as he ran for the nearest
wall visiphone. He was dialing the guard room on that floor with one
hand as he took off the belt.

"Get a big ambulance on the roof, with a Literate medic and
orderly-driver," he ordered, unbuttoning his smock. "And four guards,
plain clothes if possible, but don't waste time changing clothes if
you don't have anybody out of uniform. Heavy-duty sono guns, sleep-gas
projectors, gas masks and pistols. Hurry." He threw the smock and belt
at the guard. "Here, Pancho; put these away for me. Thanks." He tossed
the last word back over his shoulder as he ran for the escalator.

[Illustration:]

It was three eternal minutes after he had reached the landing stage
above before the ambulance arrived, medic and orderly on the front
seat and the four guards, all in conservatively cut civilian clothes,
inside. He crowded in beside the medic, told him, "Pelton's store,"
and snapped the door shut as the big white 'copter began to rise.

They climbed to five thousand feet, and then the driver nosed his
vehicle up, cut his propeller and retracted it, and fired his rocket,
aiming toward downtown Manhattan. Four minutes later, after the rocket
stopped firing and they were on the down-curve of their trajectory,
the propeller was erected and they began letting down toward the
central landing stage of Pelton's Purchasers' Paradise. Cardon cut in
the TV and began calling the control tower.

"Ambulance, to evacuate Mr. Pelton," he called. "What's the score,
down there?"

One of Pelton's traffic-control men appeared on Cardon's screen.
"You're safe to land on the central stage, but you'd better come in at
a long angle from the north," he said. "We control the north public
stage, but the east and south stages are in the hands of the goons;
they'd fire on you. Land beside that big pile of boxes under
tarpaulins up here, but be careful; it's fireworks we didn't have time
to get into storage."

The ambulance came slanting in from uptown, and Cardon looked around
anxiously. The May-fly dance of customers' 'copters had stopped; there
was a Sabbath stillness about the big store, at least visually. A few
small figures in Literates' guards black leather moved about on the
north landing stage, and several Pelton employees were on the central
stop stage. The howling of the 'copter propeller overhead effectively
blocked out any sounds that might be coming from the building, at
least until the ambulance landed. Then a spatter of firing from below
was audible.

Cardon, the medic and the guards piled out, the latter with the
stretcher. The orderly-driver got out his tablet pistol and checked
the chamber, then settled into a posture of watchful relaxation. Major
Slater was waiting for them by one of the vertical lift platforms.

"I tried to get hold of you, but that blasted meeting was going on,
and they had the doors sealed, and--" he began.

Cardon hushed him quickly. "Around here, I'm an Illiterate," he
warned. "Where's Pelton? We've got to get him and his daughter out of
here, at once."

"He's still flat on his back, out cold," Slater said. "The medic you
sent around here gave him a shot of hypnotaine: he'll be out for a
couple of hours, yet. Prestonby's still here. He's commanding the
defense; doing a good job, too."

That was good. Ralph would help get Claire to Literates' Hall, after
they'd gotten her father to safety.

"There must be about five hundred Independent-Conservative storm
troopers in the store," Slater was saying. "Most of them got here
after we did. The city cops have all the street approaches roped off;
they're letting nobody but Grant Hamilton's thugs in."

"They were fairly friendly this morning," Cardon said. "Mayor Jameson
must have passed the word." They all got off the lift two floors down,
where they found Claire Pelton and Ralph Prestonby waiting. "Hello,
Ralph. Claire. What's the situation?"

"We have all the twelfth floor," Prestonby said. "We have about half
the eleventh, including the north and west public stages. We have the
basement and the storerooms and the warehouse--Sergeant Coccozello's
down there, with as many of the store police and Literates and
Literates' guards and store-help as he could salvage, and the
warehouse gang. They've taken most of the ground floor, the main
mezzanine, and parts of the second floor. We moved two of the 7-mm
machine guns down from the top, and we control the front street
entrance with them and a couple of sono guns. The store's isolated
from the outside by the city police, who are allowing re-enforcements
to come through for the raiders, but we're managing to stop them at
the doors."

"Have you called Radical-Socialist headquarters for help?"

"Yes, half a dozen times. There's some fellow named Yingling there,
who says that all their storm troops are over in North Jersey, on some
kind of a false-alarm riot-call, and can't be contacted."

"So?" Cardon commented gently. "That's too bad, now." Too bad for
Horace Yingling and Joe West; this time tomorrow, they'll be a pair of
dead traitors, he thought. "Well, we'll have to make do with what we
have. Where's Russ Latterman, by the way?"

Prestonby gave a sidewise glance toward Claire and shook his head, his
lips pressed tightly together. _She doesn't know, yet_, Cardon
interpreted.

"Down in the basement, with Coccozello," Prestonby said, aloud. "We're
in telephone communication with Coccozello, and have a freight
elevator running between here and the basement. Coccozello says
Latterman is using a rifle against the raiders, killing every one he
can get a shot at."

Cardon nodded. Probably vindictive about being involved in action
injurious to Pelton's commercial interests; just another odd quirk of
Literate ethics.

"We'd better get him up here," he said. "You and I have got to leave,
at once; we have to get Pelton and Claire to safety. He can help Major
Slater till we can get back with re-enforcements. I am going to kill a
man named Horace Yingling, and then I'm going to round up the storm
troops he diverted on a wild-goose chase to North Jersey." He nodded
to the medic and the four plain-clothes guards. "Get Pelton on the
stretcher. Better use the canvas flaps and the straps. He's under
hypnotaine, but it's likely to be a rough trip. Claire, get anything
you want to take with you. Ralph will take you where you'll be safe
for a while."

"But the store--" Claire began.

"Your father has riot-insurance, doesn't he? I know he does; they
doubled the premium on him when he came out for Senate. Let the
insurance company worry about the store."

The medic and the guards moved into Chester Pelton's private rest room
with the stretcher. Claire went to the desk and began picking up odds
and ends, including the pistol Cardon had given her, and putting them
in her handbag.

"We've got to keep her away from her father, for a few days, Ralph,"
he told Prestonby softly. "It's all over town that she can read and
write. We've got to give him a chance to cool off before he sees her
again. Take her to Lancedale. I have everything fixed up; she'll be
admitted to the Fraternities this afternoon, and given Literate
protection."

Prestonby grabbed his hand impulsively. "Frank! I'll never be able to
repay you for this, not if I live to be a thousand--" he began.

There was a sudden blast of sound from overhead--the banging of
machine guns, the bark of the store's 20-mm auto-cannon, the howling
of airplane jets, and the crash of explosions. Everybody in the room
jerked up and stood frozen, then Prestonby jumped for the TV-screen
and pawed at the dials. A moment later, after the screen flashed and
went black twice, they were looking across the topside landing stage
from a pickup at one corner.

A slim fighter-bomber, with square-tipped, backswept, wings, was
jetting up in almost perpendicular flight; another was coming in
toward the landing stage, and, as they watched, a flight of rockets
leaped forward from under its wings. Cardon saw the orderly-driver of
the ambulance jump down and start to run for the open lift-shaft. He
got five steps away from his vehicle. Then the rockets came in, and
one of them struck the tarpaulin-covered pile of boxes beside the
ambulance. There was a flash of multicolored flame, in which the man
and the vehicle he had left both vanished. Immediately, the screen
went black.

The fireworks had mostly exploded at the first blast; however, when
Cardon and Major Slater and one or two others reached the top landing
stage, there were still explosions. A thing the size and shape of a
two-gallon kettle, covered with red paper, came rolling toward them,
and suddenly let go with a blue-green flash, throwing a column of
smoke, in miniature imitation of an A-bomb, into the air. Something
about three feet long came whizzing at them on the end of a tail of
fire, causing them to fling themselves flat; involuntarily, Cardon's
head jerked about and his eyes followed it until it blew up with a
flash and a bang three blocks uptown. Here and there, colored fire
flared, small rockets flew about, and firecrackers popped.

The ambulance was gone, blown clear off the roof. The other 'copters
on the landing stage were a tangled mass of wreckage. The 20-mm was
toppled over; the gunner was dead, and one of the crew, half-dazed,
was trying to drag a third man from under the overturned gun. The
control tower, with the two 12-mm machine guns, was wrecked. The two
7-mm's that had been left on the top had vanished, along with the
machine gunners, in a hole that had been blown in the landing stage.

Cardon, Slater, and the others dashed forward and pulled the
auto-cannon off the injured man, hauling him and his companion over to
the lift. The two rakish-winged fighter-bombers were returning,
spraying the roof with machine-gun bullets, and behind them came a
procession of fifteen big 'copters. They dropped the lift hastily;
Slater jumped off when it was still six feet above the floor, and
began shouting orders.

"Falk: take ten men and get to the head of this lift-shaft! Burdick,
Levine: get as many men as you can in thirty seconds, and get up to
the head of the escalator! Diaz: go down and tell Sternberg to bring
all his gang up here!"

Cardon caught up a rifle and rummaged for a bandolier of ammunition,
losing about a minute in the search. The delay was fortunate; when he
got to the escalators, he was met by a rush of men hurrying down the
ascending spiral or jumping over onto the descending one.

"Sono guns!" one of them was shouting. "They have the escalator head
covered; you'll get knocked out before you get off the spiral!"

He turned and looked toward the freight lift. It was coming down again,
with Falk and his men unconscious on it, knocked senseless by bludgeons
of inaudible sound, and a half a dozen of the 'copter-borne raiders, all
wearing the white robes and hoods of the Independent-Conservative storm
troops. He swung his rifle up and began squeezing the trigger,
remembering to first make sure that the fire-control lever was set
forward for semiauto, and remembering his advice to Goodkin, that
morning. By the time the platform had stopped, all the men in white
robes were either dead or wounded, and none of the unconscious
Literates' guards along with them had been injured. The medic who had
come with Cardon, assisted by a couple of the office force, got the
casualties sorted out. There was nothing that could be done about the
men who had been sono-stunned; in half an hour or so, they would recover
consciousness with no ill effects that a couple of headache tablets
wouldn't set right.

The situation, while bad, was not immediately desperate. If the
white-clad raiders controlled the top landing stage, they were pinned
down by the firearms and sono guns of the defenders, below, who were
in a position to stop anything that came down the escalators or the
lift shaft. The fate of the first party was proof of that. And the
very magnitude of the riot guaranteed that somebody on the outside,
city police, State guards, or even Consolidated States regulars, would
be taking a hand shortly. The air attack and 'copter-landing on the
roof had been excellent tactics, but it had been a serious
policy-blunder. As long as the disturbance had been confined to the
interior of the store, the city police could shrug it off as another
minor riot on property supposed to be protected by private police, and
do nothing about it. The rocket-attack on the top landing stage and
the spectacular explosion of the fireworks temporarily stored there,
however, was something that simply couldn't be concealed or dismissed.
The cloud of varicolored smoke alone must have been visible all over
the five original boroughs of the older New York, and there were
probably rumors of atom-bombing going around.

"What gets me," Slater, who must have been thinking about the same
thing, said to Cardon, "is where they got hold of those two
fighter-bombers. That kind of stuff isn't supposed to be in private
hands."

"A couple of hundred years ago, they had something they called the
Sullivan Law," Cardon told him. "Private citizens weren't even allowed
to own pistols. But the gangsters and hoodlums seemed to be able to
get hold of all the pistols they wanted, and burp guns, too. I know of
four or five racket gangs in this area that have aircraft like that,
based up in the Adirondacks, at secret fields. Anybody who has
connections with one of those gangs can order an air attack like this
on an hour's notice, if he's able to pay for it. What I can't
understand is the Independent-Conservatives doing anything like this.
The facts about this business will be all over the state before the
polls open tomorrow--" He snapped his fingers suddenly. "Come on;
let's have a look at those fellows who came down on the lift!"

There were two dead men in white Independent-Conservative robes and
hoods, lying where they had been dragged from the lift platform.
Cardon pulled off the hoods and zipped open the white robes. One of
the men was a complete stranger; the other, however, was a man he had
seen, earlier in the day, at the Manhattan headquarters of the
Radical-Socialist Party. One of the Consolidated Illiterates'
Organization people; a follower of West and Yingling.

"So that's how it was!" he said, straightening. "Now I get it! Let's
go see if any of those wounded goons are in condition to be
questioned."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ray Pelton and Doug Yetsko had their heads out an open window on the
right side of the cab of the 'copter truck; Ray was pointing down.

"That roof, over there, looks like a good place to land," he said. "We
can get down the fire escape, and the hatch to the conveyor belt is
only half a block away."

Yetsko nodded. There'd be a watchman, or a private cop, in the
building on which Ray intended landing. A couple of hundred dollars
would take care of him, and they could leave two of Mason's boys with
the vehicles to see that he stayed bribed.

"Sure we can get in on the freight conveyor?" he asked. "Maybe it'll
be guarded."

"Then we'll have to crawl in through the cable conduit," Ray said.
"I've done that, lots of times; so have most of the other guys." He
nodded toward the body of the truck, behind, where his dozen-odd
'teenage recruits were riding. "I've played all over the store, ever
since I've been big enough to walk; I must know more about it than
anybody but the guy who built it. That's why I said we'd have to bring
bullet guns; down where we're going, we'd gas ourselves with gas guns,
and if we used sono guns, we'd knock ourselves out with the echo."

"You know, Ray, you'll make a real storm trooper," Yetsko said. "If
you manage to stay alive for another ten years, you'll be almost as
good a storm troop captain as Captain Prestonby."

That, Ray knew, was about as high praise as Doug Yetsko could give
anybody. He'd have liked to ask Doug more about Captain
Prestonby--Doug could never seem to get used to the idea of his
officer being a schoolteacher--but there was no time. The 'copter
truck was already settling onto the roof.

The watchman proved amenable to reason. He took one look at Yetsko,
with three feet of weighted fire hose in his hand, and gulped, then
accepted the two C-notes Yetsko gave him. They left a couple of
Literates' guards with the vehicles, and Ray led the way to the fire
escape, and down into the alley. A few hundred feet away, there was an
iron grating which they pulled up. Ray drew the pistol he had gotten
out of Captain Prestonby's arms locker and checked the magazine,
chamber, and safety, knowing that Yetsko and the other guards were
watching him critically, and then started climbing down the ladder.

The conduit was halfway down. Yetsko, climbing behind him, examined it
with his flashlight, probably wondering how he was going to fit
himself into a hole like that. They climbed down onto the concrete
walkway beside the conveyor belts, and in the dim light of the
overhead lamps Ray could see that the two broad belts, to and from the
store, were empty for as far as he could see in either direction.
Normally, there should be things moving constantly in both
directions--big wire baskets full of parcels for delivery, and trash
containers, going out, and bales and crates and cases of merchandise,
and empty delivery baskets and trash containers coming in. He pointed
this out to Yetsko.

"Sure," the big Literates' guards sergeant nodded. "They got control
of the opening from the terminal, and they probably got a gang up at
the other end, too," he shouted, over the noise of the conveyor belts.
"I hope they haven't got into the basement of the store."

"If they have, I know a way to get in," Ray told him. "You'd better
stay here for about five minutes, and let me scout ahead. We don't
want to run into a big gang of them ahead."

Yetsko shook his head. "No, Ray; the captain told me I was to stick
with you. I'll go along with you. And we better take another of these
kids, for a runner, in case we have to send word back."

"Ramon, you come with us," Ray said. "The rest of you, stay here for
five minutes, and then, if you don't hear from us, follow us."

"Mason, you take over," Yetsko told the guards corporal. "And keep an
eye out behind you. We're in a sandwich, here; they're behind us, and
in front of us. If anything comes at you from behind, send the kids
forward to the next conduit port."

Ray and Yetsko and Ramon Nogales started forward. Halfway to the next
conduit port, there was a smear of lubricating oil on the concrete,
and in it, and away from it in the direction of the store, they found
footprints. It was Ramon Nogales who noticed the oil on the ladder to
the next conduit port.

"You stick here," Yetsko told him, "and when Mason and the others come
up, hold them here. Tell Mason to send one of the guards forward, and
use the rest of the gang to grab anybody who comes out. Come on, Ray."

At the port beyond, they halted, waiting for Mason's man to come up.
They lost some time, thereafter, but they learned that the section of
conduit between the two ports was empty and that the main telephone
line to the store had been cut. Whoever had cut it had gone, either
forward or back away from the store. A little farther on, the sound of
shots ahead became audible over the clanking and rattling of the
conveyor belts.

"Well, I guess this is where we start crawling," Yetsko said. "Your
father's people seem to be holding the store basement against a gang
in the conveyor tunnel."

One of the boys scouted ahead, and returned to report that they could
reach the next conduit port, but that the section of both conveyor
belts ahead of him was stopped, apparently wedged.

Yetsko stood for a moment, grimacing in an effort to reach a decision.

"I'd like to just go forward and hit them from behind," he said. "But
I don't know how many of them there are, and we'd have to be careful,
shooting into them, that we didn't shoot up your father's gang, beyond
them. I wish--"

"Well, let's go through the conduit, then," Ray said. "We can slide
down a branch conduit that runs a power line into the basement. I'll
go ahead; everybody at the store knows me, and they don't know you.
They might shoot you before they found out you were a friend."

Before Yetsko could object, he started up the ladder, Yetsko behind
him and the others following. At the next conduit port, they could
hear shooting very plainly, seeming to be in front of them. At the
next one, the shooting seemed to be going on directly under them, in
the tunnel. With the flashlight Yetsko had passed forward to him, Ray
could see that the dust on the concrete floor of the three-foot by
three-foot passage between and under the power and telephone cables
was undisturbed.

A little farther on, there was an opening on the left, and a power
cable branched off downward, at a sharp angle, overhead. Ray was able
to turn about and get his feet in front of him; Yetsko had to crawl on
until he had passed it, and then back into it after Ray had entered.
Bracing one foot on either side, Ray inched his way down the
forty-degree slope, hoping that the two hundred pound weight of Doug
Yetsko wouldn't start sliding upon him.

Ahead, he could hear voices. He drew his hands and feet away from the
sides of the branch conduit and let himself slip, landing in a heap in
the electricians' shop, above the furnace rooms. Two men, who had been
working at a bench, trying to assemble a mass of equipment into a
radio, whirled, snatching weapons. Ray knew both of them--Sam
Jacobowitz and George Nyman, who serviced the store's communications
equipment. They both stared at him, swearing in amazement.

"All right, Doug!" Ray called out. "We're in! Bring the gang down!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Frank Cardon and Ralph Prestonby were waiting at the freight-elevator
door when it opened and Russell Latterman emerged, a rifle slung over
one shoulder. Cardon stepped forward and took the rifle from him.

"Come on over here, Russ," he said. "And don't do anything reckless."

They led him to one side. Latterman looked from one to the other
apprehensively, licking his lips.

"It's all right; we're not going to hurt you, Russ," Cardon assured
him. "We just want a few facts. Beside rigging that business with
Bayne, and almost killing Chet Pelton, and forcing Claire to blow her
cover, how much did you have to do with this business?"

"And who put you up to it?" Prestonby wanted to know. "My guess is
Joyner and Graves. Am I right?"

"Graves," Latterman said. "Joyner didn't have anything to do with it;
didn't know anything about it. He's in charge of the Retail
Merchandising section, and any action like this would be unethical,
since Pelton's is a client of the Retail Merchandising section. All
Graves told me to do was fix up a situation, using my own judgment,
that would provoke a Literate strike and force either Claire or Frank
here to betray Literacy. But I had no idea that it would involve a
riot like this. If I had, I'd have stood on Literates' ethics and
refused to have any part in it."

"That's about how I thought it would be," Cardon nodded. "Graves
probably was informed by Literates with the Independent-Conservatives
that this riot was planned; he wanted to get our people out of the
store. Unfortunately for him, he wasn't present at the extemporary
meeting that reversed Bayne's action in calling the strike." He handed
the rifle back to Latterman. "I just took this in case you might get
excited, before I could explain. And you can forget about the
Graves-Joyner opposition to Pelton. We had a meeting, right after
noon. Lancedale gained the upper hand; Joyner and Graves are
co-operating, now; the plan is to support Pelton and get on the inside
of the socialized Literacy program, when it's enacted."

"I still think that's a suicidal policy," Latterman said. "But not as
suicidal as splitting the Fraternities and trying to follow two
policies simultaneously. I wonder if I could put a call through to
Literates' Hall without some of these picture-readers overhearing me."

"You've been out of touch, down in the cellar, Russ." Prestonby told
him. "Our telephone line's cut, and the radio is smashed." He told
Latterman about the rocket attack on the control tower, which also
housed the store's telecast station. "So we're sandwiched, here; one
gang has us blocked at the twelfth floor, and another gang's up on the
roof, trying to get down at us from above, and we've no way to
communicate with the outside. We can pick up the regular telecasts,
but nobody outside seems to be paying much attention to us."

"There's a lot of equipment down in the electricians' shop," Latterman
said. "Maybe we could rig up a sending set that could contact one of
the telecast stations outside."

"That's an idea," Prestonby said. "Let's see what we can do about it."

They went into Pelton's office. The store owner was still lying
motionless on his stretcher. Claire was fiddling with a telecast
receiving set; she had just tuned out a lecture on Home
Beautifications and had gotten the mid-section of a serial in which
three couples were somewhat confused over just who was married to
whom.

"Nobody seems to realize what's happening to us!" she said, turning
the knob again. Then she froze, as Elliot C. Mongery--this time
sponsored by Parc, the Miracle Cleanser--appeared on the screen.

"... And it seems that the attack on Chester Pelton has picked up new
complications; somebody seems determined to wipe out the whole Pelton
family, because, only ten minutes ago, some twenty armed men invaded
the Mineola High School, where Pelton's fifteen-year-old son, Raymond,
is a student, and forced their way to the office of Literate First
Class Ralph N. Prestonby, in an attempt to kidnap young Pelton.
Neither Literate Prestonby, the principal, nor the Pelton boy, who was
supposed to be in his office, could be found. The raiders were put to
flight by the presence of mind of Literate Martha B. Collins, who
pressed the button which turned in the fire alarm, filling the halls
with a mob of students. The interlopers fled in panic after being set
upon and almost mobbed--"

Prestonby looked worried. "I left Ray in my office, with Doug Yetsko,"
he said. "I can't understand--"

[Illustration:]

"Maybe Yetsko got a tip that they were coming and got Ray out of the
school," Cardon suggested. "I hope he took him home." He caught
himself just in time to avoid mentioning the platoon of Literates'
guards at the Pelton home, which he was not supposed to know about.
"Don't worry, Claire; if anything'd happened to Ray, Mongery'd have
been screaming about it to high heaven. That's what he's paid to do."

"Well, I'll stake my life on it; if anybody tried to do anything to
Ray while Yetsko was with him, you'd have heard about it," Prestonby
said. "It'd have been a bigger battle than this one."

"... Can't seem to find out anything about what's going on at
Pelton's store," Mongery continued. "Telephone and radio communication
seems to be broken, and, although there is continuous firing going on
inside the building, the city police, who have a cordon completely
around it, say that the situation in the store is well in hand.
Considering Chester Pelton's attacks on the city administration and
particularly the police department, I leave to your imagination what
they mean by that. We do know that a large body of unidentified
plug-uglies whom Police Inspector Cassidy claims are 'special
officers' are holding the conveyor line into the store at the downtown
Manhattan terminal, and nobody seems to know what's going on at the
other end--"

"They have the sections of both belts at the store entrance end
wedged," Latterman said, coming up at the moment. "Coccozello has a
barricade thrown up across the store end of the tunnel, and they have
a barricade about fifty yards down the tunnel. That's where I was
fighting when you called me up."

"Anything being done about gold-berging up a radio sending-set?"
Prestonby asked.

"Yes. I just called Coccozello," Latterman said. "Fortunately, the
inter-department telephone is still working. He's put a couple of men
to work, and thinks he may have a set in operation in about half an
hour."

"... And if, as I much fear, Chester Pelton has been murdered, then I
advise all listening to me to go to the polls tomorrow and vote the
straight Anarchist ticket. If we've got to have anarchy in this
country, let's have anarchy for all, and not just for Grant Hamilton
and his political adherents!" Mongery was saying.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a series of heavy explosions on the floor above. Everybody
grabbed weapons and hurried outside, crowding onto the escalators. The
floor above was a shambles, with bodies lying about, and the
descending escalator was packed with white-robed attackers, who had
apparently prepared for their charge by tossing down a number of
heavy fragmentation bombs. Cardon had a burp gun, this time; he
emptied the fifty-shot magazine into the hooded hoodlums who were
coming down. Prestonby, beside him, had a heavy sono gun; he kept it
trained on the head of the escalator and held the trigger back until
it was empty, then slapped in a fresh clip of the small blank
cartridges which produced the sound waves that were amplified and
altered to stunning vibrations. Still, many of the attackers got
through. More were dropping down the lift-platform shaft. Cardon's
submachine-gun ceased firing, the action open on an empty clip. He
dropped it and yanked the heavy pistol from his shoulder holster.
Then, from the direction of the freight elevator, reinforcements
arrived, headed by a huge man in the black leather of the Literates'
guard, who swung a three-foot length of fire hose with his right hand
and fired a pistol with his left, and a boy in a black-and-red jacket
who was letting off a burp gun in deliberate, parsimonious, bursts. It
was a second or two before Cardon recognized them as Prestonby's
bodyguard, Doug Yetsko, and Claire Pelton's brother Ray. There were
four Literates' guards and about a dozen boys with them, all firing
with a variety of weapons.

At the same time, others were arriving on the escalators from the
floors below, firing as they came off--Slater's Literates' guards, the
Literates and their black-jacketed troopers of Hopkinson's store
service crew, the fifteen survivors of the twenty riflemen from Macy &
Gimbel's. The attackers turned and crowded onto the ascending
escalator. Most of them got away, the casualties being carried up by
the escalator. Doug Yetsko bounded forward and brought his fire hose
down on the back of one invader's neck. Then, after a last spatter of
upward-aimed shots from the defenders, there was silence.

Cardon stepped forward and yanked the hood from the man whom Yetsko
had knocked down, hoping that he had a stunned prisoner who could be
interrogated. The man was dead, however, with a broken neck. For a
moment, Cardon looked down at the heavy, brutal features of Joe West,
the Illiterates' Organization man. If Chester Pelton got out of this
mess alive and won the election tomorrow, there was going to have to
be a purge in the Radical-Socialist party, and something was going to
have to be done about the Consolidated Organization of Illiterates. He
turned to Yetsko.

"You and your gang got here just in the nick of time," he said. "How
did you get into the store?"

"Through the freight conveyor, into the basement."

"But I thought those goons had both ends of that plugged."

"They did," Yetsko grinned. "But Ray Pelton took us in at the middle,
and we crawled through a cable conduit to get around the gang at this
end."

Cardon looked around quickly, in search of Ray. The boy, having come
out of the excitement of battle, was looking around at the litter of
dead and wounded on the blood-splashed floor. His eyes widened, and he
gulped. Then, carefully setting the safety of his burp gun and
slinging it, he went over and leaned against the wall, and was sick.

Prestonby, with Claire Pelton beside him, started toward the
white-faced, retching boy. Yetsko put out a hamlike hand to stop them.

"If the kid wants to be sick, let him be sick," he said. "He's got a
right to. I was sicker'n that, after my first fight. But he won't do
that the next time."

"There isn't going to be any next time!" Claire declared, with
maternal protectiveness.

"That's what you think, Miss Claire," Yetsko told her. "That boy's
gonna make a great storm trooper," he declared. "Every bit as great as
Captain Prestonby, here."

Claire looked up at Prestonby almost worshipfully. "And I never knew
anything about your being a fighting-man, till today," she said.
"Ralph, there's so much about you that I don't know."

"There'll be plenty of time to find out, now, honey," he told her.

Cardon stepped over the body of Joe West and went up to them.

"Sorry to intrude on you two," he said, "but we've got to figure on
how to get out of here. Could we get out the same way you got in?" he
asked Yetsko. "And take Mr. Pelton with us?"

Yetsko frowned. "Part of the way, we gotta crawl through this conduit;
it's only about a yard square. And we'd have to go up a ladder, and
out a manhole, to get out of the conveyor tunnel. What sorta shape's
Mr. Pelton in?"

"He's under hypnotaine, completely unconscious," Prestonby said.

"Then we'd have to drag him," Yetsko said. "Strap him up in a tarp, or
load him into a sleeping bag, if we can get hold of one."

"There are plenty, down in the warehouse," Latterman interrupted,
joining them. "And the warehouse is in our hands."

"All right," Cardon decided. "We'll take him out, now, and take him
home. I have some men there who'll take care of him. We'll have to get
you and Ray out, too," he told Claire. "I think we'll take both of you
to Literates' Hall; you'll be absolutely safe there."

"But the store," Claire started to object. "And all these people who
came here to help us--"

"As soon as I have your father home, I'm going to start rounding up a
gang to raise the siege," Cardon said. "Radical-Socialist storm
troops, and--" He grinned suddenly. "The insurance company; the one
that has the store insured against riot! Why didn't I think of them
before? They're losing money every second this thing goes on. It'll be
worth their while to start doing something to stop it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The trip out through the conduit was not so difficult, even with the
encumbrance of the unconscious Chester Pelton, but Prestonby was
convinced that, except for the giant strength of Doug Yetsko, it would
have been nearly impossible. Ray Pelton, recovered from his
after-battle nausea and steeled by responsibility, went first. Cardon
crawled after him, followed by a couple of the boys. Then came Yetsko,
dragging the sleeping bag in which Chester Pelton was packed like a
mummy. Prestonby himself followed, pushing on his future
father-in-law's feet, and Claire crawled behind, with the rest of
Ray's schoolmates for a rearguard.

They got past the battle which was still going on at the entrance to
the store basement, letting Pelton down with a rope and carrying him
onto the outward-bound belt. They left it in time to assemble under
the ladder leading to the alley through which Ray said they had
entered, and hauled Pelton up after them. Then, when they were all out
in the open again, Ray ran up the alley and mounted a fire escape,
and, in a few minutes, a big 'copter truck which had been parked on
the roof let down to them. Into this, Cardon ordered the unconscious
senatorial candidate loaded, and the boys who had come with Ray.

"I'll take him home, and then run the boys to the school," he told
Prestonby. "You and Ray and Claire get in this other 'copter and go
straight to Literates' Hall." He pointed up to the passenger vehicle
which was hovering above, waiting for the truck to leave. "Go in the
church way, and go straight to Lancedale's office. And here." He
scribbled an address and a phone number and a couple of names. "These
men have my 'copter at this address. Call them as soon as you get to
Literates' Hall and have them take it at once to Pelton's home, on
Long Island."

Prestonby nodded and watched Cardon climb into the truck. The
Literates' guard who was driving lifted it up and began windmilling
away toward the east. The passenger 'copter, driven by another guard
from the school, settled down. Putting Ray and Claire into it, he
climbed in after them.

"Ray," he said, "how would you like to be a real white-smock
Literate?"

Ray's eyes opened. "You think I'm good enough?"

"Good enough to be a novice, to start with. And I don't think you'll
stay a novice long."

Claire looked at him inquiringly, saying nothing.

"You, too, honey," he said. "Frank fixed it all up. You and Ray will
be admitted to the Fraternities, this afternoon. And that will remove
any objection to our being married."

"But ... how about the Senator?" she asked.

Prestonby shrugged. "It's all over the state now that you can read;
there's nothing that you can do about it. And Frank has a lot of
influence with him; he'll talk him around to where he'll be willing to
make the best of it, in a week or so."

       *       *       *       *       *

Russell Latterman noticed that Major Slater was looking at him in a
respectfully inquiring manner. He said nothing, and, at length, the
Literates' guards officer broke the silence.

"You didn't go out with the others."

Latterman shook his head. "No, major; I'm an executive of Pelton's
Purchasers' Paradise, however unlike its name it may look at the
moment. My job's here. I'm afraid I'll have to lean pretty heavily on
you, until Mr. Cardon can get help to us. I'm not particularly used to
combat."

"You've been doing all right with that rifle," Slater told him.

"I can hit what I aim at, yes. But I'm not used to commanding men in
combat, and I'm not much of a tactician."

Slater thrust out his hand impulsively. "I took a sort of poor view
of you, at first. I'm sorry," he said. "Want me to take command?"

"If you please, major."

"What are you going to do, after this thing's over?" Slater asked.

"Stay on with Pelton's, provided Mr. P. doesn't find out that I
organized that trick with his medicine and the safe," Latterman said.
"Since Lancedale seems to have gotten on top at the Hall, I am, as of
now, a Lancedale partisan. That's partly opportunism, and it's partly
because, since a single policy has been adopted, I feel obliged to go
along with it. I'll have to get the store back in operation, as soon
as possible. Pelton's going to need money, badly, if he's going to try
for the presidency in '44." He looked around him. "You know, I've
always wanted to run a fire sale; this'll be even better--a battle
sale!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Cardon watched Chester Pelton apprehensively as the bald-headed
merchant and senatorial candidate sipped from the tall glass in his
hand and then set it on the table beside him. His face was pale, and
he had the look of a man who has just been hit with a blackjack.

"That's an awful load of bricks to dump on a man, all at once,
Frank," he said reproachfully.

"You'd rather I told you, now, than turn on the TV and hear some
commentator talking about it, wouldn't you?" Cardon asked.

Pelton swore vilely, in a lifeless monotone, cursing Literacy, and
all Literates back to the invention of the alphabet. Then he stopped
short.

"No, Frank, I don't mean that, either. My own son and daughter are
Literates; I can't say that about them. But how long--?"

"Oh, for about a year, I'd say. I understand, now, that they were
admitted to the Fraternities six months ago," he invented.

"And they were working against me, all that time?" Pelton demanded.

Cardon shook his head. "No, Chet; they were for you, all the way. Your
daughter exposed her Literacy to save your life. Your son and his
teacher came to your store and fought for you. But there are Literates
who want to see you defeated, and they're the ones who made that
audio-visual, secretly, of the ceremony in which your son and daughter
took the Literates' Oath and received the white smock, and they're
going to telecast it this evening at twenty-one hundred. Coming on top
of the stories that have been going around all afternoon, and Slade
Gardner's speech, this morning, they think that'll be enough to defeat
you."

"Well, don't you?" Pelton gloomed. "My own kids, Literates!" He seemed
to have reached a point at which he was actually getting a masochistic
pleasure out of turning the dagger in his wounds. "Who'd trust me,
after this?"

"No, Chet; it isn't enough to beat you--if you just throw away that
crying towel and start fighting. They made one mistake that's going
to wreck them."

"What's that, Frank?" Pelton brightened, by about one angstrom unit.

"The timing, of course!" Cardon told him, impatiently. "I thought
you'd see that, at once. This telecast comes on at twenty-one hundred.
Your final speech comes on at twenty-one thirty. As soon as they've
shown this business of Claire and Ray taking the Literate Oath, you'll
be on the air, yourself, and if you put on any kind of a show worth
the name, it won't be safe for anybody in this state to be caught
wearing a white smock. Now, if they'd only had the wit to wait till
after you'd delivered that speech you've been practicing on for the
last two weeks, and then spring this on you, that would have been
different. They'd have had you over a barrel. But this way, you have
them!"

Pelton took another gulp from the tall glass at his elbow, emptying
it. "Fix me up another of these, Frank," he said. "I feel like a new
man, already." Then his face clouded again. "But we have no time to
prepare a speech, now, and I just can't ad lib one."

Cardon drew a little half-inch record-disk from his pocket case.

"Play this off," he said. "I had it fixed up, as soon as I got wise to
what was going to happen. The voice is one of the girls in my office,
over at the brewery. Pronunciation, grammar, elocution and everything
correct."

Pelton snapped the disk onto his recorder and put in the ear plug.
Then, before he pressed the stud, he looked at Cardon curiously.

"How'd you get onto this, anyhow, Frank?" he wanted to know.

"Well ... I hope you don't ask me for an accounting of all the money
I've been spending in this campaign, because some of the items would
look funny as hell, but--"

"No accounting, Frank. After all, you spent as much of your own money
as you did of mine," Pelton interrupted.

"... But I bought myself a pipe line into Literates' Hall big enough
to chase an elephant through," Cardon went on, ignoring the
interruption. "This fellow Mongery, for instance." Elliot Mongery was
one of Literate Frank Cardon's best friends; he comforted his
conscience with the knowledge that Mongery would slander him just as
unscrupulously, if the interests of the Lancedale Plan were at stake.
"I have Mongery just like this." He made a clutching and lifting
gesture, as though he were picking up some small animal by the scruff
of the neck. "So, as soon as I got word of it, I started getting this
thing together. It isn't the kind of a job a Literate semanticist
would do, but it's all honest Illiterate thinking, in Illiterate
language. Turn it on, and tell me what you think of it."

While Pelton listened to the record, Cardon mixed him another of the
highballs, adding a little of the heart-stimulant the medic had given
him. Pelton was grinning savagely when he turned off the little
machine and took out the ear plug.

"Great stuff, Frank! And I won't have to ham it much; it's just about
the way I feel." He thought for a moment. "You have me talking about
my ruined store, there. Just how bad is it, anyhow?"

"Pretty bad, Chet. Latterman says it's going to take some time to get
it fixed up, but he expects to be open for business by Thursday or
Friday. He's going to put on a big Battle Sale; he says it's going to
make retail-merchandising history. And the insurance covers most of
the damage."

"Well, tell me about it. How did you get the riot stopped, after you
got me out? And how did you--?"

Cardon shook his head. "You play that record over again; get yourself
in the mood. When you go on, we'll have you in a chair, wrapped in a
blanket ... you're supposed to have crawled back out of the Valley of
the Shadow of Death to make this speech ... and we'll have the wire
run down inside the blanket, so that you can listen to the speech
while you're giving it. Chet, this is going to be one of the great
political speeches of all time--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Literate William R. Lancedale looked up from his desk and greeted his
visitor with a smile.

"Well, Frank! Sit down and accept congratulations! I suppose you got
the returns?"

Cardon nodded, dropping into a chair beside the desk. "Just came from
campaign headquarters. This automatic tally system they use on the
voting machines is really something. Complete returns tabulated and
reported for the whole state within forty minutes after the polls
closed. I won't be silly enough to ask you if you got the returns."

"I deserved that, of course," Lancedale chuckled. "Can I offer you
refreshment? A nice big stein of Cardon's Black Bottle, for instance?"

Cardon shuddered and grimaced horribly. "I've been drinking that slop
by the bucketful, all day. And Pelton's throwing a victory party,
tonight, and I'll have to choke down another half gallon of it. Give
me a cup of coffee, and one of those good cigars of yours."

Lancedale grinned at him. "Ah, yes, the jolly brewer. His own best
advertisement. How's Pelton reacting to his triumph? And what's his
attitude toward his children? I've been worrying about that; vestigial
traces of a conscience, I suppose."

"Well, I had to keep him steamed up, till after he went off the air,"
Cardon said. "Chet isn't a very good actor. But after that, I talked
to him like a Dutch uncle. Told him what a swell pair of kids and a
fine son-in-law he had. He got sore at me. Tried to throw me out of
the house, a couple of times. I was afraid he was going to have
another of those attacks. But by the time Ralph and Claire get back
from their honeymoon and Ray finishes that cram-course for Literate
prep school, he'll be ready to confer the paternal blessing all
around. I'm going to stay in town and make sure of it, and then I'm
taking about a month's vacation."

"You've earned it, all right." Lancedale poured Cardon's coffee and
passed him the cigar humidor. "How's Pelton's attitude toward the
Consolidated Illiterates' Organization, now?"

Cardon, having picked up the Italian stiletto to puncture his cigar,
looked at it carefully to make sure that it really had no edge, and
then drew it quickly across his throat.

"Just like that. You know what really happened, yesterday afternoon,
at the store, don't you?"

"Well, in general, yes. I wish you'd fill me in on some of the
details, though, Frank."

"Details he wants. Well." Cardon blew on his coffee and sipped it.
"The way we played it for propaganda purposes, of course, there was
only one big riot, and it was all the work of the wicked Literates and
their Independent-Conservative hirelings. Actually, there were two
riots. First, there was one the Independents had planned for about a
week in advance; that was the one Sforza tipped us on, the one that
started in China. Graves knew about it, enough to advise Latterman to
get all the Literates out of the store before noon, which Latterman
did, with trimmings.

"Then, there was another riot, masterminded by a couple of
Illiterates' Organization Action Committee people named Joe West and
Horace Yingling, both deceased. That was the result of Latterman's
bright idea to trap Claire and/or me into betraying Literacy. These
Illiterate fanatics made up their minds, to speak rather loosely, that
the whole Pelton family were Literates, including Chet himself. They
decided that it was better to kill off their candidate and use him for
a martyr two years from now than to elect him and have him sell them
out. They got about a hundred or so of their goons dressed in
Independent-Conservative KKK costumes, bought air support from Patsy
Callazo's mob, up in Vermont, and made that attack on the top landing
stage, after starting a fake riot in North Jersey, to draw off the
regular Radical-Socialist storm troops. Incidentally, when I found out
it was Callazo's gang that furnished those fighter bombers, I hired
another mob to go up and drop a block-buster on Callazo's field, to
teach him to keep his schnozzle out of politics."

Lancedale nodded briskly. "That I approve of. How about West and
Yingling?"

"Prestonby's muscle man, Yetsko, killed West. I took care of Comrade
Yingling, myself, after I'd gotten reinforcements to the store--first
a couple of free-lance storm troops that the insurance company hired,
and then as many of the Radical Rangers as I could gather up."

"And Pelton knows about all this?"

"He certainly does! After this caper, the Illiterates' Organization's
through, as far as any consideration or patronage from the Radicals is
concerned."

"Well, that's pretty nearly the best thing I've heard out of the whole
business," Lancedale said. "In about eight or ten years, we may want
to pull the Independent-Conservative party together again, to cash in
on public dissatisfaction with Pelton's socialized Literacy program,
which ought to be coming apart at the seams by then. And if we have
the Illiterates split into two hostile factions--"

Cardon finished his coffee. "Well, chief, I've got to be getting
along. O'Reilly can only cover me for a short while, and I have to be
getting to this victory party of Pelton's--"

Lancedale rose and shook hands with him. "I can't tell you, too many
times, what a fine job you did, Frank," he said. "I hope ... no,
knowing you, I'm positive ... that you'll be able to engineer a
reconciliation between Pelton and his son and daughter and young
Prestonby. And then, have yourself a good vacation."

"I mean to. I'm going deer hunting, to a place up in the mountains,
along the old Pennsylvania-New York state line. A little community of
about a thousand people, where everybody, men, women and children, can
read."

Lancedale was interested. "A community of Literates?"

Cardon shook his head. "Not Literates-with-a-big-L; just people who
can read and write," he replied. "It's a kind of back-eddy sort of
place, and I imagine, a couple of hundred years ago, the community was
too poor to support one of these 'progressive' school systems that
made Illiterates out of the people in the cities. Probably couldn't
raise enough money in school taxes to buy all the expensive
audio-visual equipment, so they had to use old-fashioned textbooks,
and teach the children to read from them. They have radios, and TV, of
course, but they also have a little daily paper, and they have a
community library."

Lancedale was thoughtful, for a moment. "You know, Frank, there must
be quite a few little enclaves of lower-case-literacy like that, in
back-woods and mountain communities, especially in the west and the
south. I'm going to make a project of finding such communities,
helping them, and getting recruits from them. They'll fit into the
Plan. Well, I'll be seeing you some time tomorrow, I suppose?"

He watched Cardon go out, and then poured a glass of port for himself
and sipped slowly, holding the glass to the light and watching the
ruby glow it cast on the desk top. It had been over thirty years ago,
when he had been old Jules de Chambord's assistant, that the Plan had
been first conceived. De Chambord was dead these twenty years, and he
had taken the old man's place, and they had only made the first step.
Things would move faster, now, but he would still die before the Plan
was completed, and Frank Cardon, whom he had marked as his successor,
would be an old man, and somebody like young Ray Pelton would be ready
to replace him, but the Plan would go on, until everybody would be
literate, not Literate, and illiteracy, not Illiteracy, would be a
mark of social stigma, and most people would live their whole lives
without personal acquaintance with an illiterate.

There were a few years, yet, to prepare for the next step. The white
smocks would have to go; Literates would have to sacrifice their
paltry titles and distinctions. There would have to be a
re-constitution of the Fraternities. Wilton Joyner and Harvey Graves
and the other Conservative Literates would have to be convinced,
emotionally as well as intellectually, of the need for change. There
were a few of the older brothers who could never adjust their
thinking; they would have to be promoted to positions with higher
salaries and more impressive titles and no authority whatever.

But that was all a matter of tactics; the younger men, like Frank
Cardon and Elliot Mongery and Ralph Prestonby, could take care of
that. Certain changes would occur: A stable and peaceful order of
society, for one thing. A rule of law, and the liquidation of these
goon gangs and storm troops and private armies. If a beginning at that
were made tomorrow, using the battle at Pelton's store to mobilize
public opinion, it would still take two decades to get anything really
significant done. And a renaissance of technological and scientific
progress--Today, the manufacturers changed the 'copter models twice a
year--and, except for altering the shape of a few chromium-plated
excrescences or changing the contours slightly, they were the same
'copters that had been buzzing over the country at the time of the
Third World War. Every month, the pharmaceutical companies announced a
new wonder drug--and if it wasn't sulfa, it was penicillin, and if it
wasn't penicillin it would be aureomycin. Why, most of the scientific
research was being carried on by a few Literates in the basements of a
few libraries, re-discovering the science of two centuries ago.

He sighed, and finished his port, and, as he did probably once every
six months, he re-filled the glass. He'd be seventy-two next birthday.
Maybe he'd live long enough to see--

_BOOKEND_



Duncan MacLeod hung up the suit he had taken off, and sealed his shirt,
socks and underwear in a laundry envelope bearing his name and
identity-number, tossing this into one of the wire baskets provided for
the purpose. Then, naked except for the plastic identity disk around his
neck, he went over to the desk, turned in his locker key, and passed
into the big room beyond.

Four or five young men, probably soldiers on their way to town, were
coming through from the other side. Like MacLeod, they wore only the
plastic disks they had received in exchange for the metal ones they wore
inside the reservation, and they were being searched by attendants who
combed through their hair, probed into ears and nostrils, peered into
mouths with tiny searchlights, and employed a variety of magnetic and
electronic detectors.

To this search MacLeod submitted wearily. He had become quite a
connoisseur of security measures in fifteen years' research and
development work for a dozen different nations, but the Tonto Basin
Research Establishment of the Philadelphia Project exceeded anything he
had seen before. There were gray-haired veterans of the old Manhattan
Project here, men who had worked with Fermi at Chicago, or with
Oppenheimer at Los Alamos, twenty years before, and they swore in amused
exasperation when they thought of how the relatively mild regulations of
those days had irked them. And yet, the very existence of the Manhattan
Project had been kept a secret from all but those engaged in it, and its
purpose from most of them. Today, in 1965, there might have been a few
wandering tribesmen in Somaliland or the Kirghiz Steppes who had never
heard of the Western Union's Philadelphia Project, or of the Fourth
Komintern's Red Triumph Five-Year Plan, or of the Islamic Kaliphate's
Al-Borak Undertaking, or of the Ibero-American Confederation's Cavor
Project, but every literate person in the world knew that the four great
power-blocs were racing desperately to launch the first spaceship to
reach the Moon and build the Lunar fortress that would insure world
supremacy.

He turned in the nonmagnetic identity disk at the desk on the other side
of the search room, receiving the metal one he wore inside the
reservation, and with it the key to his inside locker. He put on the
clothes he had left behind when he had passed out, and filled his
pockets with the miscellany of small articles he had not been allowed to
carry off the reservation. He knotted the garish necktie affected by the
civilian workers and in particular by members of the MacLeod Research
Team to advertise their nonmilitary status, lit his pipe, and walked out
into the open gallery beyond.

       *       *       *       *       *

Karen Hilquist was waiting for him there, reclining in one of the metal
chairs. She looked cool in the belted white coveralls, with the white
turban bound around her yellow hair, and very beautiful, and when he saw
her, his heart gave a little bump, like a geiger responding to an
ionizing particle. It always did that, although they had been together
for twelve years, and married for ten. Then she saw him and smiled, and
he came over, fanning himself with his sun helmet, and dropped into a
chair beside her.

"Did you call our center for a jeep?" he asked. When she nodded, he
continued: "I thought you would, so I didn't bother."

For a while, they sat silent, looking with bored distaste at the swarm
of steel-helmeted Army riflemen and tommy-gunners guarding the transfer
platforms and the vehicles gate. A string of trucks had been passed
under heavy guard into the clearance compound: they were now unloading
supplies onto a platform, at the other side of which other trucks were
backed waiting to receive the shipment. A hundred feet of bare concrete
and fifty armed soldiers separated these from the men and trucks from
the outside, preventing contact.

"And still they can't stop leaks," Karen said softly. "And we get blamed
for it."

MacLeod nodded and started to say something, when his attention was
drawn by a commotion on the driveway. A big Tucker limousine with an
O.D. paint job and the single-starred flag of a brigadier general was
approaching, horning impatiently. In the back seat MacLeod could see a
heavy-shouldered figure with the face of a bad-tempered great
Dane--General Daniel Nayland, the military commander of Tonto Basin. The
inside guards jumped to attention and saluted; the barrier shot up as
though rocket-propelled, and the car slid through; the barrier slammed
down behind it. On the other side, the guards were hurling themselves
into a frenzy of saluting. Karen made a face after the receding car and
muttered something in Hindustani. She probably didn't know the literal
meaning of what she had called General Nayland, but she understood that
it was a term of extreme opprobrium.

Her husband contributed: "His idea of Heaven would be a huge research
establishment, where he'd be a five-star general, and Galileo, Newton,
Priestley, Dalton, Maxwell, Planck and Einstein would be tech
sergeants."

"And Marie Curie and Lise Meitner would be Wac corporals," Karen added.
"He really hates all of us, doesn't he?"

"He hates our Team," MacLeod replied. "In the first place, we're a lot
of civilians, who aren't subject to his regulations and don't have to
salute him. We're working under contract with the Western Union, not
with the United States Government, and as the United States participates
in the Western Union on a treaty basis, our contract has the force of a
treaty obligation. It gives us what amounts to extraterritoriality, like
Europeans in China during the Nineteenth Century. So we have our own
transport, for which he must furnish petrol, and our own armed guard,
and we fly our own flag over Team Center, and that gripes him as much as
anything else. That and the fact that we're foreigners. So wouldn't he
love to make this espionage rap stick on us!"

"And our contract specifically gives the United States the right to take
action against us in case we endanger the national security," Karen
added. She stuffed her cigarette into the not-too-recently-emptied
receiver beside her chair, her blue eyes troubled. "You know, some of us
could get shot over this, if we're not careful. Dunc, does it really
have to be one of our own people who--?"

"I don't see how it could be anybody else," MacLeod said. "I don't like
the idea any more than you do, but there it is."

"Well, what are we going to do? Is there nobody whom we can trust?"

"Among the technicians and guards, yes. I could think of a score
who are absolutely loyal. But among the Team itself--the top
researchers--there's nobody I'd take a chance on but Kato Sugihara."

"Can you even be sure of him? I'd hate to think of him as a traitor,
but--"

"I have a couple of reasons for eliminating Kato," MacLeod said. "In the
first place, outside nucleonic and binding-force physics, there are only
three things he's interested in. Jitterbugging, hand-painted neckties,
and Southern-style cooking. If he went over to the Komintern, he
wouldn't be able to get any of those. Then, he only spends about half
his share of the Team's profits, and turns the rest back into the Team
Fund. He has a credit of about a hundred thousand dollars, which he'd
lose by leaving us. And then, there's another thing. Kato's father was
killed on Guadalcanal, in 1942, when he was only five. After that he was
brought up in the teachings of Bushido by his grandfather, an old-time
samurai. Bushido is open to some criticism, but nobody can show where
double-crossing your own gang is good Bushido. And today, Japan is
allied with the Western Union, and in any case, he wouldn't help the
Komintern. The Japs'll forgive Russia for that Mussolini back-stab in
1945 after the Irish start building monuments to Cromwell."

A light-blue jeep, lettered _MacLeod Research Team_ in cherry-red, was
approaching across the wide concrete apron. MacLeod grinned.

"Here it comes. Fasten your safety belt when you get in; that's Ahmed
driving."

Karen looked at her watch. "And it's almost time for dinner. You know, I
dread the thought of sitting at the table with the others, and wondering
which of them is betraying us."

"Only nine of us, instead of thirteen, and still one is a Judas,"
MacLeod said. "I suppose there's always a place for Judas, at any
table."

       *       *       *       *       *

The MacLeod Team dined together, apart from their assistants and
technicians and students. This was no snobbish attempt at
class-distinction: matters of Team policy were often discussed at the
big round table, and the more confidential details of their work. People
who have only their knowledge and their ideas to sell are wary about
bandying either loosely, and the six men and three women who faced each
other across the twelve-foot diameter of the teakwood table had no other
stock-in-trade.

They were nine people of nine different nationalities, or they were nine
people of the common extra-nationality of science. That Duncan MacLeod,
their leader, had grown up in the Transvaal and his wife had been born
in the Swedish university town of Upsala was typical not only of their
own group but of the hundreds of independent research-teams that had
sprung up after the Second World War. The scientist-adventurer may have
been born of the relentless struggle for scientific armament supremacy
among nations and the competition for improved techniques among
industrial corporations during the late 1950s and early '60s, but he had
been begotten when two masses of uranium came together at the top of a
steel tower in New Mexico in 1945. And, because scientific research is
pre-eminently a matter of pooling brains and efforts, the independent
scientists had banded together into teams whose leaders acquired power
greater than that of any _condottiere_ captain of Renaissance Italy.

Duncan MacLeod, sitting outwardly relaxed and merry and secretly
watchful and bitterly sad, was such a free-captain of science. One by
one, the others had rallied around him, not because he was a greater
physicist than they, but because he was a bolder, more clever, less
scrupulous adventurer, better able to guide them through the maze of
international power-politics and the no less ruthless if less nakedly
violent world of Big Industry.

There was his wife, Karen Hilquist, the young metallurgist who, before
she was twenty-five, had perfected a new hardening process for SKF and
an incredibly tough gun-steel for the Bofors works. In the few minutes
since they had returned to Team Center, she had managed to change her
coveralls for a skirt and blouse, and do something intriguing with her
hair.

And there was Kato Sugihara, looking younger than his twenty-eight
years, who had begun to demonstrate the existence of whole orders of
structure below the level of nuclear particles.

There was Suzanne Maillard, her gray hair upswept from a face that had
never been beautiful but which was alive with something rarer than mere
beauty: she possessed, at the brink of fifty, a charm and smartness that
many women half her age might have envied, and she knew more about
cosmic rays than any other person living.

And Adam Lowiewski, his black mustache contrasting so oddly with his
silver hair, frantically scribbling equations on his doodling-pad, as
though his racing fingers could never keep pace with his brain, and
explaining them, with obvious condescension, to the boyish-looking
Japanese beside him. He was one of the greatest of living mathematicians
by anybody's reckoning--_the_ greatest, by his own.

And Sir Neville Lawton, the electronics expert, with thinning red-gray
hair and meticulously-clipped mustache, who always gave the impression
of being in evening clothes, even when, as now, he was dressed in faded
khaki.

And Heym ben-Hillel, the Israeli quantum and wave-mechanics man, his
heaping dinner plate an affront to the Laws of Moses, his white hair a
fluffy, tangled chaos, laughing at an impassively-delivered joke the
English knight had made.

And Rudolf von Heldenfeld, with a thin-lipped killer's mouth and a
frozen face that never betrayed its owner's thoughts--he was the
specialist in magnetic currents and electromagnetic fields.

And Farida Khouroglu, the Turkish girl whom MacLeod and Karen had found
begging in the streets of Istanbul, ten years ago, and who had grown up
following the fortunes of the MacLeod Team on every continent and in a
score of nations. It was doubtful if she had ever had a day's formal
schooling in her life, but now she was secretary of the Team, with a
grasp of physics that would have shamed many a professor. She had grown
up a beauty, too, with the large dark eyes and jet-black hair and
paper-white skin of her race. She and Kato Sugihara were very much in
love.

A good team; the best physics-research team in a power-mad,
knowledge-hungry world. MacLeod thought, toying with the stem of his
wineglass, of some of their triumphs: The West Australia Atomic Power
Plant. The Segovia Plutonium Works, which had got them all titled as
Grandees of the restored Spanish Monarchy. The sea-water chemical
extraction plant in Puerto Rico, where they had worked for Associated
Enterprises, whose president, Blake Hartley, had later become President
of the United States. The hard-won victory over a seemingly insoluble
problem in the Belgian Congo uranium mines----He thought, too, of the
dangers they had faced together, in a world where soldiers must use the
weapons of science and scientists must learn the arts of violence. Of
the treachery of the Islamic Kaliphate, for whom they had once worked;
of the intrigues and plots which had surrounded them in Spain; of the
many attempted kidnappings and assassinations; of the time in Basra when
they had fought with pistols and tommy guns and snatched-up clubs and
flasks of acid to defend their laboratories.

A good team--before the rot of treason had touched it. He could almost
smell the putrid stench of it, and yet, as he glanced from face to face,
he could not guess the traitor. And he had so little time--

       *       *       *       *       *

Kato Sugihara's voice rose to dominate the murmur of conversation around
the table.

"I think I am getting somewhere on my photon-neutrino-electron
interchange-cycle," he announced. "And I think it can be correlated to
the collapsed-matter research."

"So?" von Heldenfeld looked up in interest. "And not with the problem of
what goes on in the 'hot layer' surrounding the Earth?"

"No, Suzanne talked me out of that idea," the Japanese replied. "That's
just a secondary effect of the effect of cosmic rays and solar
radiations on the order of particles existing at that level. But I think
that I have the key to the problem of collapsing matter to plate the
hull of the spaceship."

"That's interesting," Sir Neville Lawton commented. "How so?"

"Well, you know what happens when a photon comes in contact with the
atomic structure of matter," Kato said. "There may be an elastic
collision, in which the photon merely bounces off. Macroscopically,
that's the effect we call reflection of light. Or there may be an
inelastic collision, when the photon hits an atom and knocks out an
electron--the old photoelectric effect. Or, the photon may be retained
for a while and emitted again relatively unchanged--the effect observed
in luminous paint. Or, the photon may penetrate, undergo a change to a
neutrino, and either remain in the nucleus of the atom or pass through
it, depending upon a number of factors. All this, of course, is old
stuff; even the photon-neutrino interchange has been known since the
mid-'50s, when the Gamow neutrino-counter was developed. But now we come
to what you have been so good as to christen the Sugihara Effect--the
neutrino picking up a negative charge and, in effect, turning into an
electron, and then losing its charge, turning back into a neutrino, and
then, as in the case of metal heated to incandescence, being emitted
again as a photon.

"At first, we thought this had no connection with the spaceship
insulation problem we are under contract to work out, and we agreed to
keep this effect a Team secret until we could find out if it had
commercial possibilities. But now, I find that it has a direct
connection with the collapsed-matter problem. When the electron loses
its negative charge and reverts to a neutrino, there is a definite
accretion of interatomic binding-force, and the molecule, or the
crystalline lattice or whatever tends to contract, and when the neutrino
becomes a photon, the nucleus of the atom contracts."

       *       *       *       *       *

Heym ben-Hillel was sitting oblivious to everything but his young
colleague's words, a slice of the flesh of the unclean beast impaled on
his fork and halfway to his mouth.

"Yes! Certainly!" he exclaimed. "That would explain so many things I
have wondered about: And of course, there are other forces at work
which, in the course of nature, balance that effect--"

"But can the process be controlled?" Suzanne Maillard wanted to know.
"Can you convert electrons to neutrinos and then to photons in
sufficient numbers, and eliminate other effects that would cause
compensating atomic and molecular expansion?"

Kato grinned, like a tomcat contemplating the bones of a fish he has
just eaten.

"Yes, I can. I have." He turned to MacLeod. "Remember those bullets I
got from you?" he asked.

MacLeod nodded. He handloaded for his .38-special, and like all advanced
cases of handloading-fever, he was religiously fanatical about
uniformity of bullet weights and dimensions. Unlike most handloaders, he
had available the instruments to secure such uniformity.

"Those bullets are as nearly alike as different objects
can be," Kato said. "They weigh 158 grains, and that means
one-five-eight-point-zero-zero-zero-practically-nothing. The diameter is
.35903 inches. All right; I've been subjecting those bullets to
different radiation-bombardments, and the best results have given me a
bullet with a diameter of .35892 inches, and the weight is unchanged. In
other words, there's been no loss of mass, but the mass had contracted.
And that's only been the first test."

"Well, write up everything you have on it, and we'll lay out further
experimental work," MacLeod said. He glanced around the table. "So far,
we can't be entirely sure. The shrinkage may be all in the crystalline
lattice: the atomic structure may be unchanged. What we need is matter
that is really collapsed."

"I'll do that," Kato said. "Barida, I'll have all my data available for
you before noon tomorrow: you can make up copies for all Team members."

"Make mine on microfilm, for projection," von Heldenfeld said.

"Mine, too," Sir Neville Lawton added.

"Better make microfilm copies for everybody," Heym ben-Hillel suggested.
"They're handier than type-script."

MacLeod rose silently and tiptoed around behind his wife and Rudolf von
Heldenfeld, to touch Kato Sugihara on the shoulder.

"Come on outside, Kato," he whispered. "I want to talk to you."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Japanese nodded and rose, following him outside onto the roof above
the laboratories. They walked over to the edge and stopped at the
balustrade.

"Kato, when you write up your stuff, I want you to falsify everything
you can. Put it in such form that the data will be absolutely worthless,
but also in such form that nobody, not even Team members, will know it
has been falsified. Can you do that?"

Kato's almond-shaped eyes widened. "Of course I can, Dunc," he replied.
"But why--?"

"I hate to say this, but we have a traitor in the Team. One of those
people back in the dining room is selling us out to the Fourth
Komintern. I know it's not Karen, and I know it's not you, and that's as
much as I do know, now."

The Japanese sucked in his breath in a sharp hiss. "You wouldn't say
that unless you were sure, Dunc," he said.

"No. At about 1000 this morning, Dr. Weissberg, the civilian director,
called me to his office. I found him very much upset. He told me that
General Nayland is accusing us--by which he meant this Team--of
furnishing secret information on our subproject to Komintern agents. He
said that British Intelligence agents at Smolensk had learned that the
Red Triumph laboratories there were working along lines of research
originated at MacLeod Team Center here. They relayed the information to
Western Union Central Intelligence, and WU passed it on to United States
Central Intelligence, and now Counter Espionage is riding Nayland about
it, and he's trying to make us the goat."

"He would love to get some of us shot," Kato said. "And that could
happen. They took a long time getting tough about espionage in this
country, but when Americans get tough about something, they get tough
right. But look here; we handed in our progress-reports to Felix
Weissberg, and he passed them on to Nayland. Couldn't the leak be right
in Nayland's own HQ?"

"That's what I thought, at first," MacLeod replied. "Just wishful
thinking, though. Fact is, I went up to Nayland's HQ and had it out with
him; accused him of just that. I think I threw enough of a scare into
him to hold him for a couple of days. I wanted to know just what it was
the Komintern was supposed to have got from us, but he wouldn't tell me.
That, of course, was classified-stuff."

"Well?"

"Well then, Karen and I got our digestive tracts emptied and went in to
town, where I could use a phone that didn't go through a military
switch-board, and I put through a call to Allan Hartley, President
Hartley's son. He owes us a break, after the work we did in Puerto Rico.
I told him all I wanted was some information to help clear ourselves,
and he told me to wait a half an hour and then call Counter Espionage
Office in Washington and talk to General Hammond."

"Ha! If Allan Hartley's for us, what are we worried about?" Kato asked.
"I always knew he was the power back of Associated Enterprises and his
father was the front-man: I'll bet it's the same with the Government."

"Allan Hartley's for us as long as our nose is clean. If we let it get
dirty, we get it bloodied, too. We have to clean it ourselves," MacLeod
told him. "But here's what Hammond gave me: The Komintern knows all
about our collapsed-matter experiments with zinc, titanium and nickel.
They know about our theoretical work on cosmic rays, including Suzanne's
work up to about a month ago. They know about that effect Sir Neville
and Heym discovered two months ago." He paused. "And they know about the
photon-neutrino-electron interchange."

Kato responded to this with a gruesome double-take that gave his face
the fleeting appearance of an ancient samurai war mask.

"That wasn't included in any report we ever made," he said. "You're
right: the leak comes from inside the Team. It must be Sir Neville, or
Suzanne, or Heym ben-Hillel, or Adam Lowiewski, or Rudolf von
Heldenfeld, or--No! No, I can't believe it could be Farida!" He looked
at MacLeod pleadingly. "You don't think she could have--?"

"No, Kato. The Team's her whole life, even more than it is mine. She
came with us when she was only twelve, and grew up with us. She doesn't
know any other life than this, and wouldn't want any other. It has to be
one of the other five."

"Well, there's Suzanne," Kato began. "She had to clear out of France
because of political activities, after the collapse of the Fourth
Republic and the establishment of the Rightist Directoire in '57. And
she worked with Joliot-Curie, and she was at the University of Louvain
in the early '50s, when that place was crawling with Commies."

"And that brings us to Sir Neville," MacLeod added. "He dabbles in
spiritualism; he and Suzanne do planchette-seances. A planchette can be
manipulated. Maybe Suzanne produced a communication advising Sir Neville
to help the Komintern."

"Could be. Then, how about Lowiewski? He's a Pole who can't go back to
Poland, and Poland's a Komintern country." Kato pointed out. "Maybe he'd
sell us out for amnesty, though why he'd want to go back there, the way
things are now--?"

"His vanity. You know, missionary-school native going back to the
village wearing real pants, to show off to the savages. Used to be a
standing joke, down where I came from." MacLeod thought for a moment.
"And Rudolf: he's always had a poor view of the democratic system of
government. He might feel more at home with the Komintern. Of course,
the Ruskis killed his parents in 1945--"

"So what?" Kato retorted. "The Americans killed my father in 1942, but
I'm not making an issue out of it. That was another war; Japan's a
Western Union country, now. So's Germany----How about Heym, by the way?
Remember when the Komintern wanted us to come to Russia and do the same
work we're doing here?"

"I remember that after we turned them down, somebody tried to kidnap
Karen," MacLeod said grimly. "I remember a couple of Russians got rather
suddenly dead trying it, too."

"I wasn't thinking of that. I was thinking of our round-table argument
when the proposition was considered. Heym was in favor of accepting. Now
that, I would say, indicates either Communist sympathies or an
overtrusting nature," Kato submitted. "And a lot of grade-A traitors
have been made out of people with trusting natures."

MacLeod got out his pipe and lit it. For a long time, he stared out
across the mountain-ringed vista of sagebrush, dotted at wide intervals
with the bulks of research-centers and the red roofs of the villages.

"Kato, I think I know how we're going to find out which one it is," he
said. "First of all, you write up your data, and falsify it so that it
won't do any damage if it gets into Komintern hands. And then--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day started in an atmosphere of suppressed excitement and
anxiety, which, beginning with MacLeod and Karen and Kato Sugihara,
seemed to communicate itself by contagion to everybody in the MacLeod
Team's laboratories. The top researchers and their immediate assistants
and students were the first to catch it; they ascribed the tension under
which their leader and his wife and the Japanese labored to the recent
developments in the collapsed-matter problem. Then, there were about a
dozen implicitly-trusted technicians and guards, who had been secretly
gathered in MacLeod's office the night before and informed of the crisis
that had arisen. Their associates could not miss the fact that they were
preoccupied with something unusual.

They were a variegated crew; men who had been added to the Team in every
corner of the world. There was Ahmed Abd-el-Rahman, the Arab jeep-driver
who had joined them in Basra. There was the wiry little Greek whom
everybody called Alex Unpronounceable. There was an Italian, and two
Chinese, and a cashiered French Air Force officer, and a Malay, and the
son of an English earl who insisted that his name was Bertie Wooster.
They had sworn themselves to secrecy, had heard MacLeod's story with a
polylingual burst of pious or blasphemous exclamations, and then they
had scattered, each to the work assigned him.

MacLeod had risen early and submitted to the ordeal of the search to
leave the reservation and go to town again, this time for a conference
at the shabby back-street cigar store that concealed a Counter Espionage
center. He had returned just as Farida Khouroglu was finishing the
microfilm copies of Kato's ingeniously-concocted pseudo-data. These
copies were distributed at noon, while the Team was lunching, along with
carbons of the original type-script.

He was the first to leave the table, going directly to the basement,
where Alex Unpronounceable and the man who had got his alias from the
works of P. G. Wodehouse were listening in on the telephone calls going
in and out through the Team-center switch-board, and making recordings.
For two hours, MacLeod remained with them. He heard Suzanne Maillard and
some woman who was talking from a number in the Army married-officers'
settlement making arrangements about a party. He heard Rudolf von
Heldenfeld make a date with some girl. He listened to a violent
altercation between the Team chef and somebody at Army Quartermaster's
HQ about the quality of a lot of dressed chicken. He listened to a call
that came in for Adam Lowiewski, the mathematician.

"This is Joe," the caller said. "I've got to go to town late this
afternoon, but I was wondering if you'd have time to meet me at the
Recreation House at Oppenheimer Village for a game of chess. I'm calling
from there, now."

"Fine; I can make it," Lowiewski's voice replied. "I'm in the middle of
a devil's own mathematical problem; maybe a game of chess would clear my
head. I have a new queen's-knight gambit I want to try on you, anyhow."

Bertie Wooster looked up sharply. "Now there; that may be what we're--"

The telephone beside MacLeod rang. He scooped it up; named himself into
it.

It was Ahmed Abd-el-Rahman. "Look, chief; I tail this guy to Oppenheimer
Village," the Arab, who had learned English from American movies,
answered. "He goes into the rec-joint. I slide in after him, an' he
ain't in sight. I'm lookin' around for him, see, when he comes bargin'
outa the Don Ameche box. Then he grabs a table an' a beer. What next?"

"Stay there; keep an eye on him," MacLeod told him. "If I want you, I'll
call."

MacLeod hung up and straightened, feeling under his packet for his
.38-special.

"That's it, boys," he said. "Lowiewski. Come on."

"Hah!" Alex Unpronounceable had his gun out and was checking the
cylinder. He spoke briefly in description of the Polish mathematician's
ancestry, physical characteristics, and probable post-mortem
destination. Then he put the gun away, and the three men left the
basement.

       *       *       *       *       *

For minutes that seamed like hours, MacLeod and the Greek waited on the
main floor, where they could watch both the elevators and the stairway.
Bertie Wooster had gone up to alert Kato Sugihara and Karen. Then the
door of one of the elevators opened and Adam Lowiewski emerged, with
Kato behind him, apparently lost in a bulky scientific journal he was
reading. The Greek moved in from one side, and MacLeod stepped in front
of the Pole.

"Hi, Adam," he greeted. "Have you looked into that batch of data yet?"

"Oh, yes. Yes." Lowiewski seemed barely able to keep his impatience
within the bounds of politeness. "Of course, it's out of my line, but
the mathematics seems sound." He started to move away.

"You're not going anywhere," MacLeod told him. "The chess game is over.
The red pawns are taken--the one at Oppenheimer Village, and the one
here."

There was a split second in which Lowiewski struggled--almost
successfully--to erase the consternation from his face.

"I don't know what you're talking about," he began. His right hand
started to slide under his left coat lapel.

MacLeod's Colt was covering him before he could complete the movement.
At the same time, Kato Sugihara dropped the paper-bound periodical,
revealing the thin-bladed knife he had concealed under it. He stepped
forward, pressing the point of the weapon against the Pole's side. With
the other hand, he reached across Lowiewski's chest and jerked the
pistol from his shoulder-holster. It was one of the elegant little .32
Beretta 1954 Model automatics.

"Into the elevator," MacLeod ordered. An increasing pressure of Kato's
knife emphasized the order. "And watch him; don't let him get rid of
anything," he added to the Greek.

"If you would explain this outrage--" Lowiewski began. "I assume it is
your idea of a joke--"

Without even replying, MacLeod slammed the doors and started the
elevator upward, letting it rise six floors to the living quarters.
Karen Hilquist and the aristocratic black-sheep who called himself
Bertie Wooster were waiting when he opened the door. The Englishman took
one of Lowiewski's arms; MacLeod took the other. The rest fell in behind
as they hustled the captive down the hall and into the big sound-proofed
dining room. They kept Lowiewski standing, well away from any movable
object in the room; Alex Unpronounceable took his left arm as MacLeod
released it and went to the communicator and punched the all-outlets
button.

"Dr. Maillard; Dr. Sir Neville Lawton; Dr. ben-Hillel; Dr. von
Heldenfeld; Mlle. Khouroglu," he called. "Dr. MacLeod speaking. Come at
once, repeat at once, to the round table--Dr. Maillard; Dr. Sir Neville
Lawton--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Karen said something to the Japanese and went outside. For a while,
nobody spoke. Kato came over and lit a cigarette in the bowl of
MacLeod's pipe. Then the other Team members entered in a body. Evidently
Karen had intercepted them in the hallway and warned them that they
would find some unusual situation inside; even so, there was a burst of
surprised exclamations when they found Adam Lowiewski under detention.

"Ladies and gentlemen," MacLeod said, "I regret to tell you that I have
placed our colleague, Dr. Lowiewski, under arrest. He is suspected of
betraying confidential data to agents of the Fourth Komintern.
Yesterday, I learned that data on all our work here, including
Team-secret data on the Sugihara Effect, had got into the hands of the
Komintern and was being used in research at the Smolensk laboratories. I
also learned that General Nayland blames this Team as a whole with
double-dealing and selling this data to the Komintern. I don't need to
go into any lengthy exposition of General Nayland's attitude toward this
Team, or toward Free Scientists as a class, or toward the
research-contract system. Nor do I need to point out that if he pressed
these charges against us, some of us could easily suffer death or
imprisonment."

"So he had to have a victim in a hurry, and pulled my name out of the
hat," Lowiewski sneered.

"I appreciate the gravity of the situation," Sir Neville Lawton said.
"And if the Sugihara Effect was among the data betrayed, I can
understand that nobody but one of us could have betrayed it. But why,
necessarily, should it be Adam? We all have unlimited access to all
records and theoretical data."

"Exactly. But collecting information is the smallest and easiest part of
espionage. Almost anybody can collect information. Where the spy really
earns his pay is in transmitting of information. Now, think of the
almost fantastic security measures in force here, and consider how you
would get such information, including masses of mathematical data beyond
any human power of memorization, out of this reservation."

"Ha, nobody can take anything out," Suzanne Maillard said. "Not even
one's breakfast. Is Adam accused of sorcery, too?"

"The only material things that are allowed to leave this reservation are
sealed cases of models and data shipped to the different development
plants. And the Sugihara Effect never was reported, and wouldn't go out
that way," Heym ben-Hillel objected.

"But the data on the Sugihara Effect reached Smolensk," MacLeod replied.
"And don't talk about Darwin and Wallace: it wasn't a coincidence. This
stuff was taken out of the Tonto Basin Reservation by the only person
who could have done so, in the only way that anything could leave the
reservation without search. So I had that person shadowed, and at the
same time I had our telephone lines tapped, and eavesdropped on all
calls entering or leaving this center. And the person who had to be the
spy-courier called Adam Lowiewski, and Lowiewski made an appointment to
meet him at the Oppenheimer Village Recreation House to play chess."

"Very suspicious, very suspicious," Lowiewski derided. "I receive a call
from a friend at the same time that some anonymous suspect is using the
phone. There are only five hundred telephone conversations a minute on
this reservation."

"Immediately, Dr. Lowiewski attempted to leave this building," MacLeod
went on. "When I intercepted him, he tried to draw a pistol. This one."
He exhibited the Beretta. "I am now going to have Dr. Lowiewski
searched, in the presence of all of you." He nodded to Alex and the
Englishman.

       *       *       *       *       *

They did their work thoroughly. A pile of Lowiewski's pocket effects was
made on the table; as each item was added to it, the Pole made some
sarcastic comment.

"And that pack of cigarettes: unopened," he jeered. "I suppose I
communicated the data to the manufacturers by telepathy, and they
printed it on the cigarette papers in invisible ink."

"Maybe not. Maybe you opened the pack, and then resealed it," Kato
suggested. "A heated spatula under the cellophane; like this."

He used the point of his knife to illustrate. The cellophane came
unsealed with surprising ease: so did the revenue stamp. He dumped out
the contents of the pack: sixteen cigarettes, four cigarette tip-ends,
four bits snapped from the other ends--and a small aluminum microfilm
capsule.

Lowiewski's face twitched. For an instant, he tried vainly to break
loose from the men who held him. Then he slumped into a chair. Heym
ben-Hillel gasped in shocked surprise. Suzanne Maillard gave a short,
felinelike cry. Sir Neville Lawton looked at the capsule curiously and
said: "Well, my sainted Aunt Agatha!"

"That's the capsule I gave him, at noon," Farida Khouroglu exclaimed,
picking it up. She opened it and pulled out a roll of colloidex
projection film. There was also a bit of cigarette paper in the capsule,
upon which a notation had been made in Kyrilic characters.

Rudolf von Heldenfeld could read Russian. "'Data on new development of
photon-neutrino-electron interchange. 22 July, '65. Vladmir.' Vladmir, I
suppose, is this _schweinhund's_ code name," he added.

The film and the paper passed from hand to hand. The other members of
the Team sat down; there was a tendency to move away from the chair
occupied by Adam Lowiewski. He noticed this and sneered.

"Afraid of contamination from the moral leper?" he asked. "You were glad
enough to have me correct your stupid mathematical errors."

Kato Sugihara picked up the capsule, took a final glance at the
cigarette pack, and said to MacLeod: "I'll be back as soon as this is
done." With that, he left the room, followed by Bertie Wooster and the
Greek.

       *       *       *       *       *

Heym ben-Hillel turned to the others: his eyes had the hurt and puzzled
look of a dog that has been kicked for no reason. "But why did he do
this?" he asked.

"He just told you," MacLeod replied. "He's the great Adam Lowiewski.
Checking math for a physics-research team is beneath his dignity. I
suppose the Komintern offered him a professorship at Stalin University."
He was watching Lowiewski's face keenly. "No," he continued. "It was
probably the mathematics chair of the Soviet Academy of Sciences."

"But who was this person who could smuggle microfilm out of the
reservation?" Suzanne Maillard wanted to know. "Somebody has invented
teleportation, then?"

MacLeod shook his head. "It was General Nayland's chauffeur. It had to
be. General Nayland's car is the only thing that gets out of here
without being searched. The car itself is serviced at Army vehicles
pool; nobody could hide anything in it for a confederate to pick up
outside. Nayland is a stuffed shirt of the first stuffing, and a tinpot
Hitler to boot, but he is fanatically and incorruptibly patriotic. That
leaves the chauffeur. When Nayland's in the car, nobody even sees him;
he might as well be a robot steering-device. Old case of Father Brown's
Invisible Man. So, since he had to be the courier, all I did was have
Ahmed Abd-el-Rahman shadow him, and at the same time tap our phones.
When he contacted Lowiewski, I knew Lowiewski was our traitor."

Sir Neville Lawton gave a strangling laugh. "Oh, my dear Aunt Fanny! And
Nayland goes positively crackers on security. He gets goose pimples
every time he hears somebody saying 'E = mc^{2}', for fear a Komintern
spy might hear him. It's a wonder he hasn't put the value of Planck's
Constant on the classified list. He sets up all these fantastic search
rooms and barriers, and then he drives through the gate, honking his
bloody horn, with his chauffeur's pockets full of top secrets. Now I've
seen everything!"

"Not quite everything," MacLeod said. "Kato's going to put that capsule
in another cigarette pack, and he'll send one of his lab girls to
Oppenheimer Village with it, with a message from Lowiewski to the effect
that he couldn't get away. And when this chauffeur takes it out, he'll
run into a Counter Espionage road-block on the way to town. They'll
shoot him, of course, and they'll probably transfer Nayland to the
Mississippi Valley Flood Control Project, where he can't do any more
damage. At least, we'll have him out of our hair."

"If we have any hair left," Heym ben-Hillel gloomed. "You've got Nayland
into trouble, but you haven't got us out of it."

"What do you mean?" Suzanne Maillard demanded. "He's found the traitor
and stopped the leak."

"Yes, but we're still responsible, as a team, for this betrayal," the
Israeli pointed out. "This Nayland is only a symptom of the enmity which
politicians and militarists feel toward the Free Scientists, and of
their opposition to the research-contract system. Now they have a
scandal to use. Our part in stopping the leak will be ignored; the
publicity will be about the treason of a Free Scientist."

"That's right," Sir Neville Lawton agreed. "And that brings up another
point. We simply can't hand this fellow over to the authorities. If we
do, we establish a precedent that may wreck the whole system under which
we operate."

"Yes: it would be a fine thing if governments start putting Free
Scientists on trial and shooting them," Farida Khouroglu supported him.
"In a few years, none of us would be safe."

"But," Suzanne cried, "you are not arguing that this species of an
animal be allowed to betray us unpunished?"

"Look," Rudolf von Heldenfeld said. "Let us give him his pistol, and one
cartridge, and let him remove himself like a gentleman. He will spare
himself the humiliation of trial and execution, and us all the
embarrassment of having a fellow scientist pilloried as a traitor."

"Now there's a typical Prussian suggestion," Lowiewski said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kato Sugihara, returning alone, looked around the table. "Did I miss
something interesting?" he asked.

"Oh, very," Lowiewski told him. "Your Junker friend thinks I should
perform _seppuku_."

Kato nodded quickly. "Excellent idea!" he congratulated von Heldenfeld.
"If he does, he'll save everybody a lot of trouble. Himself included."
He nodded again. "If he does that, we can protect his reputation, after
he's dead."

"I don't really see how," Sir Neville objected. "When the Counter
Espionage people were brought into this, the thing went out of our
control."

"Why, this chauffeur was the spy, as well as the spy-courier," MacLeod
said. "The information he transmitted was picked up piecemeal from
different indiscreet lab-workers and students attached to our team. Of
course, we are investigating, mumble-mumble. Naturally, no one will
admit, mumble-mumble. No stone will be left unturned, mumble-mumble.
Disciplinary action, mumble-mumble."

"And I suppose he got that microfilm piecemeal, too?" Lowiewski asked.

"Oh, that?" MacLeod shrugged. "That was planted on him. One of our girls
arranged an opportunity for him to steal it from her, after we began to
suspect him. Of course, Kato falsified everything he put into that
report. As information, it's worthless."

"Worthless? It's better than that," Kato grinned. "I'm really sorry the
Komintern won't get it. They'd try some of that stuff out with the big
betatron at Smolensk, and a microsecond after they'd throw the switch,
Smolensk would look worse than Hiroshima did."

"Well, why would our esteemed colleague commit suicide, just at this
time?" Karen Hilquist asked.

"Maybe plutonium poisoning." Farida suggested. "He was doing something
in the radiation-lab and got some Pu in him, and of course, shooting's
not as painful as that. So--"

"Oh, my dear!" Suzanne protested. "That but stinks! The great Adam
Lowiewski, descending from his pinnacle of pure mathematics, to perform
a vulgar experiment? With actual _things_?" The Frenchwoman gave an
exaggerated shudder. "Horrors!"

"Besides, if our people began getting radioactive, somebody would be
sure to claim we were endangering the safely of the whole establishment,
and the national-security clause would be invoked, and some nosy person
would put a geiger on the dear departed," Sir Neville added.

"Nervous collapse." Karen said. "According to the laity, all scientists
are crazy. Crazy people kill themselves. Adam Lowiewski was a scientist.
Ergo Adam Lowiewski killed himself. Besides, a nervous collapse isn't
instrumentally detectable."

Heym ben-Hillel looked at MacLeod, his eyes troubled.

"But, Dunc; have we the right to put him to death, either by his own
hand or by an Army firing squad?" he asked. "Remember he is not only a
traitor; he is one of the world's greatest mathematical minds. Have we a
right to destroy that mind?"

Von Heldenfeld shouted, banging his fist on the table: "I don't care if
he's Gauss and Riemann and Lorenz and Poincare and Minkowski and
Whitehead and Einstein, all collapsed into one! The man is a stinking
traitor, not only to us, but to all scientists and all sciences! If he
doesn't shoot himself, hand him over to the United States, and let them
shoot him! Why do we go on arguing?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lowiewski was smiling, now. The panic that had seized him in the hallway
below, and the desperation when the cigarette pack had been opened, had
left him.

"Now I have a modest proposal, which will solve your difficulties," he
said. "I have money, papers, clothing, everything I will need, outside
the reservation. Suppose you just let me leave here. Then, if there is
any trouble, you can use this fiction about the indiscreet underlings,
without the unnecessary embellishment of my suicide--"

Rudolf von Heldenfeld let out an inarticulate roar of fury. For an
instant he was beyond words. Then he sprang to his feet.

"Look at him!" he cried. "Look at him, laughing in our faces, for the
dupes and fools he thinks we are!" He thrust out his hand toward
MacLeod. "Give me the pistol! He won't shoot himself; I'll do it for
him!"

"It would work, Dunc. Really, it would," Heym ben-Hillel urged.

"No," Karen Hilquist contradicted. "If he left here, everybody would
know what had happened, and we'd be accused of protecting him. If he
kills himself, we can get things hushed up: dead traitors are good
traitors. But if he remains alive, we must disassociate ourselves from
him by handing him over."

"And wreck the prestige of the Team?" Lowiewski asked.

"At least you will not live to see that!" Suzanne retorted.

Heym ben-Hillel put his elbows on the table and his head in his hands.
"Is there no solution to this?" he almost wailed.

"Certainly: an obvious solution," MacLeod said, rising. "Rudolf has just
stated it. Only I'm leader of this Team, and there are, of course, jobs
a team-leader simply doesn't delegate." The safety catch of the Beretta
clicked a period to his words.

"No!" The word was wrenched almost physically out of Lowiewski. He, too,
was on his feet, a sudden desperate fear in his face. "No! You wouldn't
murder me!"

"The term is 'execute'," MacLeod corrected. Then his arm swung up, and
he shot Adam Lowiewski through the forehead.

For an instant, the Pole remained on his feet. Then his knees buckled,
and he fell forward against the table, sliding to the floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

MacLeod went around the table, behind Kato Sugihara and Farida Khouroglu
and Heym ben-Hillel, and stood looking down at the man he had killed. He
dropped the automatic within a few inches of the dead renegade's
outstretched hand, then turned to face the others.

"I regret," he addressed them, his voice and face blank of expression,
"to announce that our distinguished colleague, Dr. Adam Lowiewski, has
committed suicide by shooting, after a nervous collapse resulting from
overwork."

Sir Neville Lawton looked critically at the motionless figure on the
floor.

"I'm afraid we'll have trouble making that stick, Dunc," he said. "You
shot him at about five yards; there isn't a powder mark on him."

"Oh, sorry; I forgot." MacLeod's voice was mockingly contrite. "It was
Dr. Lowiewski's expressed wish that his remains be cremated as soon
after death as possible, and that funeral services be held over his
ashes. The big electric furnace in the metallurgical lab will do, I
think."

"But ... but there'll be all sorts of formalities--" the Englishman
protested.

"Now you forget. Our contract," MacLeod reminded him. "We stand upon our
contractual immunity: we certainly won't allow any stupid bureaucratic
interference with our deceased colleague's wishes. We have a regular
M.D. on our payroll, in case anybody has to have a death certificate to
keep him happy, but beyond that--" He shrugged.

"It burns me up, though!" Suzanne Maillard cried. "After the spaceship
is built, and the Moon is annexed to the Western Union, there will be
publicity, and people will eulogize this species of an Iscariot!"

Heym ben-Hillel, who had been staring at MacLeod in shocked unbelief,
roused himself.

"Well, why not? Isn't the creator of the Lowiewski function
transformations and the rules of inverse probabilities worthy of
eulogy?" He turned to MacLeod. "I couldn't have done what you did, but
maybe it was for the best. The traitor is dead; the mathematician will
live forever."

"You miss the whole point," MacLeod said. "Both of you. It wasn't a
question of revenge, like gangsters bumping off a double-crosser. And it
wasn't a question of whitewashing Lowiewski for posterity. We are the
MacLeod Research Team. We owe no permanent allegiance to, nor
acknowledge the authority of, any national sovereignty or any
combination of nations. We deal with national governments as with
equals. In consequence, we must make and enforce our own laws.

"You must understand that we enjoy this status only on sufferance. The
nations of the world tolerate the Free Scientists only because they need
us, and because they know they can trust us. Now, no responsible
government official is going to be deceived for a moment by this suicide
story we've confected. It will be fully understood that Lowiewski was a
traitor, and that we found him out and put him to death. And, as a
corollary, it will be understood that this Team, as a Team, is fully
trustworthy, and that when any individual Team member is found to be
untrustworthy, he will be dealt with promptly and without public
scandal. In other words, it will be understood, from this time on, that
the MacLeod Team is worthy of the status it enjoys and the
responsibilities concomitant with it."

_BOOKEND_


They started giving me the business as soon as I came through the door
into the Secretary's outer office.

There was Ethel K'wang-Li, the Secretary's receptionist, at her desk.
There was Courtlant Staynes, the assistant secretary to the
Undersecretary for Economic Penetration, and Norman Gazarin, from
Protocol, and Toby Lawder, from Humanoid Peoples' Affairs, and Raoul
Chavier, and Hans Mannteufel, and Olga Reznik.

It was a wonder there weren't more of them watching the condemned man's
march to the gibbet: the word that the Secretary had called me in must
have gotten all over the Department since the offices had opened.

"Ah, Mr. Machiavelli, I presume," Ethel kicked off.

"Machiavelli, Junior." Olga picked up the ball. "At least, that's the
way he signs it."

"God's gift to the Consular Service, and the Consular Service's gift to
Policy Planning," Gazarin added.

"Take it easy, folks. These Hooligan Diplomats would as soon shoot you
as look at you," Mannteufel warned.

"Be sure and tell the Secretary that your friends all want important
posts in the Galactic Empire." Olga again.

"Well, I'm glad some of you could read it," I fired back. "Maybe even a
few of you understood what it was all about."

"Don't worry, Silk," Gazarin told me. "Secretary Ghopal understands what
it was all about. All too well, you'll find."

A buzzer sounded gently on Ethel K'wang-Li's desk. She snatched up the
handphone and whispered into it. A deathly silence filled the room while
she listened, whispered some more, then hung it up.

They were all staring at me.

"Secretary Ghopal is ready to see Mr. Stephen Silk," she said. "This
way, please."

As I started across the room, Staynes began drumming on the top of the
desk with his fingers, the slow reiterated rhythm to which a man marches
to a military execution.

"A cigarette?" Lawder inquired tonelessly. "A glass of rum?"


There were three men in the Secretary of State's private office. Ghopal
Singh, the Secretary, dark-faced, gray-haired, slender and elegant,
meeting me halfway to his desk. Another slender man, in black, with a
silver-threaded, black neck-scarf: Rudolf Klüng, the Secretary of the
Department of Aggression.

And a huge, gross-bodied man with a fat baby-face and opaque black eyes.

When I saw him, I really began to get frightened.

The fat man was Natalenko, the Security Coördinator.

"Good morning, Mister Silk," Secretary Ghopal greeted me, his hand
extended. "Gentlemen, Mr. Stephen Silk, about whom we were speaking.
This way, Mr. Silk, if you please."

There was a low coffee-table at the rear of the office, and four easy
chairs around it. On the round brass table-top were cups and saucers, a
coffee urn, cigarettes--and a copy of the current issue of the _Galactic
Statesmen's Journal_, open at an article entitled _Probable Future
Courses of Solar League Diplomacy_, by somebody who had signed himself
Machiavelli, Jr.

I was beginning to wish that the pseudonymous Machiavelli, Jr. had never
been born, or, at least, had stayed on Theta Virgo IV and been a
wineberry planter as his father had wanted him to be.

As I sat down and accepted a cup of coffee, I avoided looking at the
periodical. They were probably going to hang it around my neck before
they shoved me out of the airlock.

"Mr. Silk is, as you know, in our Consular Service," Ghopal was saying
to the others. "Back on Luna on rotation, doing something in Mr.
Halvord's section. He is the gentleman who did such a splendid job for
us on Assha--Gamma Norma III.

"And, as he has just demonstrated," he added, gesturing toward the
_Statesman's Journal_ on the Benares-work table, "he is a student both
of the diplomacy of the past and the implications of our present
policies."

"A bit frank," Klüng commented dubiously.

"But judicious," Natalenko squeaked, in the high eunuchoid voice that
came so incongruously from his bulk. "He aired his singularly accurate
predictions in a periodical that doesn't have a circulation of more than
a thousand copies outside his own department. And I don't think the
public's semantic reactions to the terminology of imperialism is as bad
as you imagine. They seem quite satisfied, now, with the change in the
title of your department, from Defense to Aggression."

"Well, we've gone into that, gentlemen," Ghopal said. "If the article
really makes trouble for us, we can always disavow it. There's no
censorship of the _Journal_. And Mr. Silk won't be around to draw fire
on us."

_Here it comes_, I thought.

"That sounds pretty ominous, doesn't it, Mr. Silk?" Natalenko tittered
happily, like a ten-year-old who has just found a new beetle to pull the
legs out of.

"It's really not as bad as it sounds, Mr. Silk," Ghopal hastened to
reassure me. "We are going to have to banish you for a while, but I
daresay that won't be so bad. The social life here on Luna has probably
begun to pall, anyhow. So we're sending you to Capella IV."

"Capella IV," I repeated, trying to remember something about it. Capella
was a GO-type, like Sol; that wouldn't be so bad.

"New Texas," Klüng helped me out.

_Oh, God, no!_ I thought.

"It happens that we need somebody of your sort on that planet, Mr.
Silk," Ghopal said. "Some of the trouble is in my department and some of
it is in Mr. Klüng's; for that reason, perhaps it would be better if
Coördinator Natalenko explained it to you."

"You know, I assume, our chief interest in New Texas?" Natalenko asked.

"I had some of it for breakfast, sir," I replied. "Supercow."

Natalenko tittered again. "Yes, New Texas is the butcher shop of the
galaxy. In more ways than one, I'm afraid you'll find. They just
butchered one of our people there a short while ago. Our Ambassador, in
fact."

That would be Silas Cumshaw, and this was the first I'd heard about it.

I asked when it had happened.

"A couple of months ago. We just heard about it last evening, when the
news came in on a freighter from there. Which serves to point up
something you stressed in your article--the difficulties of trying to
run a centralized democratic government on a galactic scale. But we have
another interest, which may be even more urgent than our need for New
Texan meat. You've heard, of course, of the z'Srauff."

That was a statement, not a question; Natalenko wasn't trying to insult
me. I knew who the z'Srauff were; I'd run into them, here and there. One
of the extra-solar intelligent humanoid races, who seemed to have been
evolved from canine or canine-like ancestors, instead of primates. Most
of them could speak Basic English, but I never saw one who would admit
to understanding more of our language than the 850-word Basic
vocabulary. They occupied a half-dozen planets in a small star-cluster
about forty light-years beyond the Capella system. They had developed
normal-space reaction-drive ships before we came into contact with
them, and they had quickly picked up the hyperspace-drive from us back
in those days when the Solar League was still playing Missionaries of
Progress and trying to run a galaxy-wide Point-Four program.

In the past century, it had become almost impossible for anybody to get
into their star-group, although z'Srauff ships were orbiting in on every
planet that the League had settled or controlled. There were z'Srauff
traders and small merchants all over the galaxy, and you almost never
saw one of them without a camera. Their little meteor-mining boats were
everywhere, and all of them carried more of the most modern radar and
astrogational equipment than a meteor-miner's lifetime earnings would
pay for.

I also knew that they were one of the chief causes of ulcers and
premature gray hair at the League capital on Luna. I'd done a little
reading on pre-spaceflight Terran history; I had been impressed by the
parallel between the present situation and one which had culminated, two
and a half centuries before, on the morning of 7 December, 1941.

"What," Natalenko inquired, "do you think Machiavelli, Junior would do
about the z'Srauff?"

"We have a Department of Aggression," I replied. "Its mottoes are, 'Stop
trouble before it starts,' and, 'If we have to fight, let's do it on the
other fellow's real estate.' But this situation is just a little too
delicate for literal application of those principles. An unprovoked
attack on the z'Srauff would set every other non-human race in the
galaxy against us.... Would an attack by the z'Srauff on New Texas
constitute just provocation?"

"It might. New Texas is an independent planet. Its people are
descendants of emigrants from Terra who wanted to get away from the rule
of the Solar League. We've been trying for half a century to persuade
the New Texan government to join the League. We need their planet, for
both strategic and commercial reasons. With the z'Srauff for neighbors,
they need us as much at least as we need them. The problem is to make
them understand that."

I nodded again. "And an attack by the z'Srauff would do that, too, sir,"
I said.

Natalenko tittered again. "You see, gentlemen! Our Mr. Silk picks things
up very handily, doesn't he?" He turned to Secretary of State Ghopal.
"You take it from there," he invited.

Ghopal Singh smiled benignly. "Well, that's it, Stephen," he said. "We
need a man on New Texas who can get things done. Three things, to be
exact.

"First, find out why poor Mr. Cumshaw was murdered, and what can be done
about it to maintain our prestige without alienating the New Texans.

"Second, bring the government and people of New Texas to a realization
that they need the Solar League as much as we need them.

"And, third, forestall or expose the plans for the z'Srauff invasion of
New Texas."

_Is that all, now?_ I thought. _He doesn't want a diplomat; he wants a
magician._

"And what," I asked, "will my official position be on New Texas, sir? Or
will I have one, of any sort?"

"Oh, yes, indeed, Mr. Silk. Your official position will be that of
Ambassador Plenipotentiary and Envoy Extraordinary. That, I believe, is
the only vacancy which exists in the Diplomatic Service on that planet."

At Dumbarton Oaks Diplomatic Academy, they haze the freshmen by making
them sit on a one-legged stool and balance a teacup and saucer on one
knee while the upper classmen pelt them with ping-pong balls. Whoever
invented that and the other similar forms of hazing was one of the great
geniuses of the Service. So I sipped my coffee, set down the cup, took a
puff from my cigarette, then said:

"I am indeed deeply honored, Mr. Secretary. I trust I needn't go into
any assurances that I will do everything possible to justify your trust
in me."

"I believe he will, Mr. Secretary," Natalenko piped, in a manner that
chilled my blood.

"Yes, I believe so," Ghopal Singh said. "Now, Mr. Ambassador, there's a
liner in orbit two thousand miles off Luna, which has been held from
blasting off for the last eight hours, waiting for you. Don't bother
packing more than a few things; you can get everything you'll need
aboard, or at New Austin, the planetary capital. We have a man whom
Coördinator Natalenko has secured for us, a native New Texan, Hoddy
Ringo by name. He'll act as your personal secretary. He's aboard the
ship now. You'll have to hurry, I'm afraid.... Well, _bon voyage_, Mr.
Ambassador."




CHAPTER II


The death-watch outside had grown to about fifteen or twenty. They were
all waiting in happy anticipation as I came out of the Secretary's
office.

"What did he do to you, Silk?" Courtlant Staynes asked, amusedly.

"Demoted me. Kicked me off the Hooligan Diplomats," I said glumly.

"Demoted you from the Consular Service?" Staynes asked scornfully.
"Impossible!"

"Yes. He demoted me to the Cookie Pushers. Clear down to Ambassador."

They got a terrific laugh. I went out, wondering what sort of noises
they'd make, the next morning, when the appointments sheet was posted.


I gathered a few things together, mostly small personal items, and all
the microfilms that I could find on New Texas, then got aboard the Space
Navy cutter that was waiting to take me to the ship. It was a four-hour
trip and I put in the time going over my hastily-assembled microfilm
library and using a stenophone to dictate a reading list for the
spacetrip.

As I rolled up the stenophone-tape, I wondered what sort of secretary
they had given me; and, in passing, why Natalenko's department had
furnished him.

Hoddy Ringo....

Queer name, but in a galactic civilization, you find all sorts of names
and all sorts of people bearing them, so I was prepared for anything.

And I found it.

I found him standing with the ship's captain, inside the airlock, when I
boarded the big, spherical space-liner. A tubby little man, with
shoulders and arms he had never developed doing secretarial work, and a
good-natured, not particularly intelligent face.

_See the happy moron, he doesn't give a damn_, I thought.

Then I took a second look at him. He might be happy, but he wasn't a
moron. He just looked like one. Natalenko's people often did, as one of
their professional assets.

I also noticed that he had a bulge under his left armpit the size of an
eleven-mm army automatic.

He was, I'd been told, a native of New Texas. I gathered, after talking
with him for a while, that he had been away from his home planet for
over five years, was glad to be going back, and especially glad that he
was going back under the protection of Solar League diplomatic immunity.

In fact, I rather got the impression that, without such protection, he
wouldn't have been going back at all.

I made another discovery. My personal secretary, it seemed, couldn't
read stenotype. I found that out when I gave him the tape I'd dictated
aboard the cutter, to transcribe for me.

"Gosh, boss. I can't make anything out of this stuff," he confessed,
looking at the combination shorthand-Braille that my voice had put onto
the tape.

"Well, then, put it in a player and transcribe it by ear," I told him.

He didn't seem to realize that that could be done.

"How did you come to be sent as my secretary, if you can't do
secretarial work?" I wanted to know.

He got out a bag of tobacco and a book of papers and began rolling a
cigarette, with one hand.

"Why, shucks, boss, nobody seemed to think I'd have to do this kinda
work," he said. "I was just sent along to show you the way around New
Texas, and see you don't get inta no trouble."

He got his handmade cigarette drawing, and hitched the strap that went
across his back and looped under his right arm. "A guy that don't know
the way around can get inta a lotta trouble on New Texas. If you call
gettin' killed trouble."

So he was a bodyguard ... and I wondered what else he was. One thing, it
would take him forty-two years to send a radio message back to Luna, and
I could keep track of any other messages he sent, in letters or on tape,
by ships. In the end, I transcribed my own tape, and settled down to
laying out my three weeks' study-course on my new post.

I found, however, that the whole thing could be learned in a few hours.
The rest of what I had was duplication, some of it contradictory, and it
all boiled down to this:

Capella IV had been settled during the first wave of extrasolar
colonization, after the Fourth World--or First Interplanetary--War.
Some time around 2100. The settlers had come from a place in North
America called Texas, one of the old United States. They had a lengthy
history--independent republic, admission to the United States, secession
from the United States, reconquest by the United States, and general
intransigence under the United States, the United Nations and the Solar
League. When the laws of non-Einsteinian physics were discovered and the
hyperspace-drive was developed, practically the entire population of
Texas had taken to space to find a new home and independence from
everybody.

They had found Capella IV, a Terra-type planet, with a slightly higher
mean temperature, a lower mass and lower gravitational field, about
one-quarter water and three-quarters land-surface, at a stage of
evolutionary development approximately that of Terra during the late
Pliocene. They also found supercow, a big mammal looking like the
unsuccessful attempt of a hippopotamus to impersonate a dachshund and
about the size of a nuclear-steam locomotive. On New Texas' plains,
there were billions of them; their meat was fit for the gods of Olympus.
So New Texas had become the meat-supplier to the galaxy.

There was very little in any of the microfilm-books about the politics
of New Texas and such as it was, it was very scornful. There were such
expressions as 'anarchy tempered by assassination,' and 'grotesque
parody of democracy.'

There would, I assumed, be more exact information in the material which
had been shoved into my hand just before boarding the cutter from Luna,
in a package labeled _TOP SECRET: TO BE OPENED ONLY IN SPACE, AFTER THE
FIRST HYPERJUMP._ There was also a big trunk that had been placed in my
suite, sealed and bearing the same instructions.

I got Hoddy out of the suite as soon as the ship had passed out of the
normal space-time continuum, locked the door of my cabin and opened the
parcel.

It contained only two loose-leaf notebooks, both labeled with the Solar
League and Department seals, both adorned with the customary
bloodthirsty threats against the unauthorized and the indiscreet. They
were numbered _ONE_ and _TWO_.

_ONE_ contained four pages. On the first, I read:


_FINAL MESSAGE
OF THE FIRST SOLAR LEAGUE AMBASSADOR
TO
NEW TEXAS
ANDREW JACKSON HICKOCK_

_I agree with none of the so-called information about this planet on
file with the State Department on Luna. The people of New Texas are
certainly not uncouth barbarians. Their manners and customs, while
lively and unconventional, are most charming. Their dress is graceful
and practical, not grotesque; their soft speech is pleasing to the ear.
Their flag is the original flag of the Republic of Texas; it is
definitely not a barbaric travesty of our own emblem. And the underlying
premises of their political system should, as far as possible, be
incorporated into the organization of the Solar League. Here politics is
an exciting and exacting game, in which only the true representative of
all the people can survive._


_DEPARTMENT ADDENDUM_

_After five years on New Texas, Andrew Jackson Hickock resigned, married
a daughter of a local rancher and became a naturalized citizen of that
planet. He is still active in politics there, often in opposition to
Solar League policies._


That didn't sound like too bad an advertisement for the planet. I was
even feeling cheerful when I turned to the next page, and:


_FINAL MESSAGE
OF THE SECOND SOLAR LEAGUE
AMBASSADOR TO
NEW TEXAS
CYRIL GODWINSON_

_Yes and no; perhaps and perhaps not; pardon me; I agree with everything
you say. Yes and no; perhaps and perhaps not; pardon me; I agree..._


_DEPARTMENT ADDENDUM_


_After seven years on New Texas, Ambassador Godwinson was recalled;
adjudged hopelessly insane._

And then:


_FINAL MESSAGE
OF THE THIRD SOLAR LEAGUE
AMBASSADOR TO NEW TEXAS
R. F. GULLIS_

_I find it very pleasant to inform you that when you are reading this, I
will be dead._


_DEPARTMENT ADDENDUM_

_Committed suicide after six months on New Texas._


I turned to the last page cautiously, found:


_FINAL MESSAGE
OF THE FOURTH SOLAR LEAGUE
AMBASSADOR TO NEW TEXAS
SILAS CUMSHAW_

_I came to this planet ten years ago as a man of pronounced and
outspoken convictions. I have managed to keep myself alive here by
becoming an inoffensive nonentity. If I continue in this course, it will
be only at the cost of my self-respect. Beginning tonight, I am going to
state and maintain positive opinions on the relation between this planet
and the Solar League._


_DEPARTMENT ADDENDUM_

_Murdered at the home of Andrew J. Hickcock. (see p. 1.)_


And that was the end of the first notebook. Nice, cheerful reading;
complete, solid briefing.

I was, frankly, almost afraid to open the second notebook. I hefted it
cautiously at first, saw that it contained only about as many pages as
the first and that those pages were sealed with a band around them.

I took a quick peek, read the words on the band:

_Before reading, open the sealed trunk which has been included with your
luggage._

So I laid aside the book and dragged out the sealed trunk, hesitated,
then opened it.

Nothing shocked me more than to find the trunk ... full of clothes.

There were four pairs of trousers, light blue, dark blue, gray and
black, with wide cuffs at the bottoms. There were six or eight shirts,
their colors running the entire spectrum in the most violent shades.
There were a couple of vests. There were two pairs of short boots with
high heels and fancy leather-working, and a couple of hats with
four-inch brims.

And there was a wide leather belt, practically a leather corset.

I stared at the belt, wondering if I was really seeing what was in front
of me.

Attached to the belt were a pair of pistols in right- and left-hand
holsters. The pistols were seven-mm Krupp-Tatta Ultraspeed automatics,
and the holsters were the spring-ejection, quick-draw holsters which
were the secret of the State Department Special Services.

_This must be a mistake_, I thought. _I'm an Ambassador now and
Ambassadors never carry weapons._

The sanctity of an Ambassador's person not only made the carrying of
weapons unnecessary, so that an armed Ambassador was a contradiction of
diplomatic terms, but it would be an outrageous insult to the nation to
which he had been accredited.

Like taking a poison-taster to a friendly dinner.

Maybe I was supposed to give the belt and the holsters to Hoddy
Ringo....

So I tore the sealed band off the second notebook and read through it.

I was to wear the local costume on New Texas. That was something
unusual; even in the Hooligan Diplomats, we leaned over backward in
wearing Terran costume to distinguish ourselves from the people among
whom we worked.

I was further advised to start wearing the high boots immediately, on
shipboard, to accustom myself to the heels. These, I was informed, were
traditional. They had served a useful purpose, in the early days on
Terran Texas, when all travel had been on horseback. On horseless and
mechanized New Texas, they were a useless but venerated part of the
cultural heritage.

There were bits of advice about the hat, and the trousers, which for
some obscure reason were known as Levis. And I was informed, as an
order, that I was to wear the belt and the pistols at all times outside
the Embassy itself.

That was all of the second notebook.

The two notebooks, plus my conversation with Ghopal, Klüng and
Natalenko, completed my briefing for my new post.

I slid off my shoes and pulled on a pair of boots. They fitted
perfectly. Evidently I had been tapped for this job as soon as word of
Silas Cumshaw's death had reached Luna and there must have been some
fantastic hurrying to get my outfit ready.

I didn't like that any too well, and I liked the order to carry the
pistols even less. Not that I had any objection to carrying weapons,
_per se_: I had been born and raised on Theta Virgo IV, where the
children aren't allowed outside the house unattended until they've
learned to shoot.

But I did have strenuous objections to being sent, virtually ignorant of
local customs, on a mission where I was ordered to commit deliberate
provocation of the local government, immediately on the heels of my
predecessor's violent death.

The author of _Probable Future Courses of Solar League Diplomacy_ had
recommended the use of provocation to justify conquest. If the New
Texans murdered two Solar League Ambassadors in a row, nobody would
blame the League for moving in with a space-fleet and an army....

I was beginning to understand how Doctor Guillotin must have felt while
his neck was being shoved into his own invention.

I looked again at the notebooks, each marked in red: _Familiarize
yourself with contents and burn or disintegrate._

I'd have to do that, of course. There were a few non-humans and a lot of
non-League people aboard this ship. I couldn't let any of them find out
what we considered a full briefing for a new Ambassador.

So I wrapped them in the original package and went down to the lower
passenger zone, where I found the ship's third officer. I told him that
I had some secret diplomatic matter to be destroyed and he took me to
the engine room. I shoved the package into one of the mass-energy
convertors and watched it resolve itself into its constituent protons,
neutrons and electrons.

On the way back, I stopped in at the ship's bar.

Hoddy Ringo was there, wrapped up in--and I use the words literally--a
young lady from the Alderbaran system. She was on her way home from one
of the quickie divorce courts on Terra and was celebrating her marital
emancipation. They were so entangled with each other that they didn't
notice me. When they left the bar, I slipped after them until I saw them
enter the lady's stateroom. That, of course, would have Hoddy
immobilized--better word, located--for a while. So I went back to our
suite, picked the lock of Hoddy's room, and allowed myself half an hour
to search his luggage.

All of his clothes were new, but there were not a great many of them.
Evidently he was planning to re-outfit himself on New Texas. There were
a few odds and ends, the kind any man with a real home planet will hold
on to, in the luggage.

He had another eleven-mm pistol, made by Consolidated-Martian
Metalworks, mate to the one he was carrying in a shoulder-holster, and a
wide two-holster belt like the one furnished me, but quite old.

I greeted the sight and the meaning of the old holsters with joy: they
weren't the State Department Special Services type. That meant that
Hoddy was just one of Natalenko's run-of-the-gallows cutthroats, not
important enough to be issued the secret equipment.

But I was a little worried over what I found hidden in the lining of one
of his bags, a letter addressed to Space-Commander Lucius C. Stonehenge,
Aggression Department Attaché, New Austin Embassy. I didn't have either
the time or the equipment to open it. But, knowing our various Departments,
I tried to reassure myself with the thought that it was only a
letter-of-credence, with the real message to be delivered orally.

About the real message I had no doubts: _arrange the murder of
Ambassador Stephen Silk in such a way that it looks like another New
Texan job...._


Starting that evening--or what passed for evening aboard a ship in
hyperspace--Hoddy and I began a positively epochal binge together.

I had it figured this way: as long as we were on board ship, I was
perfectly safe. On the ship, in fact, Hoddy would definitely have given
his life to save mine. I'd have to be killed on New Texas to give
Klüng's boys their excuse for moving in.

And there was always the chance, with no chance too slender for me to
ignore, that I might be able to get Hoddy drunk enough to talk, yet
still be sober enough myself to remember what he said.

Exact times, details, faces, names, came to me through a sort of hazy
blur as Hoddy and I drank something he called superbourbon--a New Texan
drink that Bourbon County, Kentucky, would never have recognized. They
had no corn on New Texas. This stuff was made out of something called
superyams.

There were at least two things I got out of the binge. First, I learned
to slug down the national drink without batting an eye. Second, I
learned to control my expression as I uncovered the fact that everything
on New Texas was supersomething.

I was also cautious enough, before we really got started, to leave my
belt and guns with the purser. I didn't want Hoddy poking around those
secret holsters. And I remember telling the captain to radio New Austin
as soon as we came out of our last hyperspace-jump, then to send the
ship's doctor around to give me my hangover treatments.

But the one thing I wanted to remember, as the hangover shots brought me
back to normal life, I found was the one thing I couldn't remember. What
was the name of that girl--a big, beautiful blond--who joined the party
along with Hoddy's grass widow from Alderbaran and stayed with it to the
end?

Damn, I wished I could remember her name!


When we were fifteen thousand miles off-planet and the lighters from New
Austin spaceport were reported on the way, I got into the skin-tight
Levis, the cataclysmic-colored shirt, and the loose vest, tucked my big
hat under my arm, and went to the purser's office for my guns, buckling
them on. When I got back to the suite, Hoddy had put on his pistols and
was practicing quick draws in front of the mirror. He took one look at
my armament and groaned.

"You're gonna get yourself killed for sure, with that rig, an' them
popguns," he told me.

"These popguns'll shoot harder and make bigger holes than that pair of
museum-pieces you're carrying," I replied.

"An' them holsters!" Hoddy continued. "Why, it'd take all day to get
your guns outa them! You better let me find you a real rig, when we get
to New Austin...."

There was a chance, of course, that he knew what I was using and wanted
to hide his knowledge. I doubted that.

"Sure, you State Department guys always know everything," he went on.
"Like them microfilm-books you was readin'. I try to tell you what
things is really like on New Texas, an' you let it go in one ear an' out
the other."

Then he wandered off to say good-bye to the grass widow from Alderbaran,
leaving me to make the last-minute check on the luggage. I was hoping
I'd be able to see that blond ... what _was_ her name; Gail
something-or-other. Let's see, she'd been at some Terran university, and
she was on her way home to ... to New Texas! Of course!


I saw her, half an hour later, in the crowd around the airlock when the
lighters came alongside, and I tried to push my way toward her. As I
did, the airlock opened, the crowd surged toward it, and she was carried
along. Then the airlock closed, after she had passed through and before
I could get to it. That meant I'd have to wait for the second lighter.

So I made the best of it, and spent the next half-hour watching the disc
of the planet grow into a huge ball that filled the lower half of the
viewscreen and then lose its curvature, and instead of moving in toward
the planet, we were going down toward it.




CHAPTER III


New Austin spaceport was a huge place, a good fifty miles outside the
city. As we descended, I could see that it was laid out like a wheel,
with the landings and the blast-off stands around the hub, and high
buildings--packing houses and refrigeration plants--along the many
spokes. It showed a technological level quite out of keeping with the
accounts I had read, or the stories Hoddy had told, about the simple
ranch life of the planet. Might be foreign capital invested there, and I
made a mental note to find out whose.

On the other hand, Old Texas, on Terra, had been heavily industrialized;
so much so that the state itself could handle the gigantic project of
building enough spaceships to move almost the whole population into
space.

Then the landing-field was rushing up at us, with the nearer ends of the
roadways and streets drawing close and the far ends lengthening out away
from us. The other lighter was already down, and I could see a crowd
around it.

There was a crowd waiting for us when we got out and went down the
escalators to the ground, and as I had expected, a special group of men
waiting for me. They were headed by a tall, slender individual in the
short black Eisenhower jacket, gray-striped trousers and black homburg
that was the uniform of the Diplomatic Service, alias the Cookie
Pushers.

Over their heads at the other rocket-boat, I could see the gold-gleaming
head of the girl I'd met on the ship.

I tried to push through the crowd and get to her. As I did, the Cookie
Pusher got in my way.

"Mr. Silk! Mr. Ambassador! Here we are!" he was clamoring. "The car for
the Embassy is right over here!" He clutched my elbow. "You have no idea
how glad we all are to see you, Mr. Ambassador!"

"Yes, yes; of course. Now, there's somebody over there I
have to see, at once." I tried to pull myself loose from his grasp.

Across the concrete between the two lighters, I could see the girl push
out of the crowd around her and wave a hand to me. I tried to yell to
her; but just then another lighter, loaded with freight, started to lift
out at another nearby stand, with the roar of half a dozen Niagaras. The
thin man in the striped trousers added to the uproar by shouting into my
ear and pulling at me.

"We haven't time!" he finally managed to make himself heard. "We're
dreadfully late now, sir! You must come with us."

Hoddy, too, had caught hold of me by the other arm.

"Come on, boss. There's gotta be some reason why he's got himself in an
uproar about whatever it is. You'll see her again."

Then, the whole gang--Hoddy, the thin man with the black homburg, his
younger accomplice in identical garb, and the chauffeur--all closed in
on me and pushed me, pulled me, half-carried me, fifty yards across the
concrete to where their air-car was parked. By this time, the tall
blond had gotten clear of the mob around her and was waving frantically
at me. I tried to wave back, but I was literally crammed into the car
and flung down on the seat. At the same time, the chauffeur was jumping
in, extending the car's wings, jetting up.

"Great God!" I bellowed. "This is the damnedest piece of impudence I've
ever had to suffer from any subordinates in my whole State Department
experience! I want an explanation out of you, and it'd better be a good
one!"

There was a deafening silence in the car for a moment. The thin man
moved himself off my lap, then sat there looking at me with the
heartbroken eyes of a friendly dog that had just been kicked for
something which wasn't really its fault.

"Mr. Ambassador, you can't imagine how sorry we all are, but if we
hadn't gotten you away from the spaceport and to the Embassy at once, we
would all have been much sorrier."

"Somebody here gunnin' for the Ambassador?" Hoddy demanded sharply.

"Oh, no! I hadn't even thought of that," the thin man almost gibbered.
"But your presence at the Embassy is of immediate and urgent necessity.
You have no idea of the state into which things have gotten.... Oh,
pardon me, Mr. Ambassador. I am Gilbert W. Thrombley, your chargé
d'affaires." I shook hands with him. "And Mr. Benito Gomez, the
Secretary of the Embassy." I shook hands with him, too, and started to
introduce Mr. Hoddy Ringo.

Hoddy, however, had turned to look out the rear window; immediately, he
gave a yelp.

"We got a tail, boss! Two of them! Look back there!"

There were two black eight-passenger aircars, of the same model,
whizzing after us, making an obvious effort to overtake us. The
chauffeur cursed and fired his auxiliary jets, then his rocket-booster.

Immediately, black rocket-fuel puffs shot away from the pursuing
aircars.

Hoddy turned in his seat, cranked open a porthole-slit in the window,
and poked one of his eleven-mm's out, letting the whole clip go.
Thrombley and Gomez slid down onto the floor, and both began trying to
drag me down with them, imploring me not to expose myself.

As far as I could see, there was nothing to expose myself to. The other
cars kept coming, but neither of them were firing at us. There was also
no indication that Hoddy's salvo had had any effect on them. Our
chauffeur went into a perfect frenzy of twisting and dodging, at the
same time using his radiophone to tell somebody to get the goddamn
gate open in a hurry. I saw the blue skies and green plains of New
Texas replacing one another above, under, in front of and behind us.
Then the car set down on a broad stretch of concrete, the wings were
retracted, and we went whizzing down a city street.

We whizzed down a number of streets. We cut corners on two wheels, and
on one wheel, and, I was prepared to swear, on no wheels. A couple of
times, with the wings retracted, we actually jetted into the air and
jumped over vehicles in front of us, landing again with bone-shaking
jolts. Then we made an abrupt turn and shot in under a concrete arch,
and a big door banged shut behind us, and we stopped, in the middle of a
wide patio, the front of the car a few inches short of a fountain. Four
or five people, in diplomatic striped trousers, local dress and the
uniform of the Space Marines, came running over.

Thrombley pulled himself erect and half-climbed, half-fell, out of the
car. Gomez got out on the other side with Hoddy; I climbed out after
Thrombley.

A tall, sandy-haired man in the uniform of the Space Navy came over.

"What the devil's the matter, Thrombley?" he demanded. Then, seeing me,
he gave me as much of a salute as a naval officer will ever bestow on
anybody in civilian clothes.

"Mr. Silk?" He looked at my costume and the pistols on my belt in
well-bred concealment of surprise. "I'm your military attaché,
Stonehenge; Space-Commander, Space Navy."

I noticed that Hoddy's ears had pricked up, but he wasn't making any
effort to attract Stonehenge's attention. I shook hands with him,
introduced Hoddy, and offered my cigarette case around.

"You seem to have had a hectic trip from the spaceport, Mr. Ambassador.
What happened?"

Thrombley began accusing our driver of trying to murder the lot of us.
Hoddy brushed him aside and explained:

"Just after we'd took off, two other cars took off after us. We speeded
up, and they speeded up, too. Then your fly-boy, here, got fancy. That
shook 'em off. Time we got into the city, we'd dropped them. Nice job of
driving. Probably saved our lives."

"Shucks, that wasn't nothin'," the driver disclaimed. "When you drive
for politicians, you're either good or you're good and dead."

"I'm surprised they started so soon," Stonehenge said. Then he looked
around at my fellow-passengers, who seemed to have realized, by now,
that they were no longer dangling by their fingernails over the brink of
the grave. "But gentlemen, let's not keep the Ambassador standing out
here in the hot sun."

So we went over the arches at the side of the patio, and were about to
sit down when one of the Embassy servants came up, followed by a man in
a loose vest and blue Levis and a big hat. He had a pair of automatics
in his belt, too.

"I'm Captain Nelson; New Texas Rangers," he introduced himself. "Which
one of you-all is Mr. Stephen Silk?"

I admitted it.

The Ranger pushed back his wide hat and grinned at me.

"I just can't figure this out," he said. "You're in the right place and
the right company, but we got a report, from a mighty good source, that
you'd been kidnapped at the spaceport by a gang of thugs!"

"A blond source?" I made curving motions with my hands. "I don't blame
her. My efficient and conscientious chargé d'affaires, Mr. Thrombley,
felt that I should reach the Embassy, here, as soon as possible, and
from where she was standing, it must have looked like a kidnapping.
Fact is, it looked like one from where I was standing, too.
Was that you and your people who were chasing us? Then I must apologize
for opening fire on you ... I hope nobody was hurt."

"No, our cars are pretty well armored. You scored a couple of times on
one of them, but no harm done. I reckon after what happened to Silas
Cumshaw, you had a right to be suspicious."

I noticed that refreshments, including several bottles, had been placed
on a big wicker table under the arched veranda.

"Can I offer you a drink, Captain, in token of mutual amity?" I asked.

"Well, now, I'd like to, Mr. Ambassador, but I'm on duty ..." he began.

"You can't be. You're an officer of the Planetary Government of New
Texas, and in this Embassy, you're in the territory of the Solar
League."

"That's right, now, Mr. Ambassador," he grinned. "Extraterritoriality.
Wonderful thing, extraterritoriality." He looked at Hoddy, who, for the
first time since I had met him, was trying to shrink into the
background. "And diplomatic immunity, too. Ain't it, Hoddy?"

After he had had his drink and departed, we all sat down. Thrombley
began speaking almost at once.

"Mr. Ambassador, you must, you simply must, issue a public statement,
immediately, sir. Only a public statement, issued promptly, will relieve
the crisis into which we have all been thrust."

"Oh, come, Mr. Thrombley," I objected. "Captain Nelson'll take care of
all that in his report to his superiors."

Thrombley looked at me for a moment as though I had been speaking to
him in Hottentot, then waved his hands in polite exasperation.

"Oh, no, no! I don't mean that, sir. I mean a public statement to the
effect that you have assumed full responsibility for the Embassy. Where
is that thing? Mr. Gomez!"

Gomez gave him four or five sheets, stapled together. He laid them on
the table, turned to the last sheet, and whipped out a pen.

"Here, sir; just sign here."

"Are you crazy?" I demanded. "I'll be damned if I'll sign that. Not till
I've taken an inventory of the physical property of the Embassy, and
familiarized myself with all its commitments, and had the books audited
by some firm of certified public accountants."

Thrombley and Gomez looked at one another. They both groaned.

"But we must have a statement of assumption of responsibility ..." Gomez
dithered.

"... or the business of the Embassy will be at a dead stop, and we can't
do anything," Thrombley finished.

"Wait a moment, Thrombley," Stonehenge cut in. "I understand Mr. Silk's
attitude. I've taken command of a good many ships and installations, at
one time or another, and I've never signed for anything I couldn't see
and feel and count. I know men who retired as brigadier generals or
vice-admirals, but they retired loaded with debts incurred because as
second lieutenants or ensigns they forgot that simple rule."

He turned to me. "Without any disrespect to the chargé d'affaires, Mr.
Silk, this Embassy has been pretty badly disorganized since Mr.
Cumshaw's death. No one felt authorized, or, to put it more accurately,
no one dared, to declare himself acting head of the Embassy--"

"Because that would make him the next target?" I interrupted. "Well,
that's what I was sent here for. Mr. Gomez, as Secretary of the Embassy,
will you please, at once, prepare a statement for the press and telecast
release to the effect that I am now the authorized head of this Embassy,
responsible from this hour for all its future policies and all its
present commitments insofar as they obligate the government of the Solar
League. Get that out at once. Tomorrow, I will present my credentials to
the Secretary of State here. Thereafter, Mr. Thrombley, you can rest in
the assurance that I'll be the one they'll be shooting at."

"But you can't wait that long, Mr. Ambassador," Thrombley almost wailed.
"We must go immediately to the Statehouse. The reception for you is
already going on."

I looked at my watch, which had been regulated aboard ship for Capella
IV time. It was just 1315.

"What time do they hold diplomatic receptions on this planet, Mr.
Thrombley?" I asked.

"Oh, any time at all, sir. This one started about 0900 when the news
that the ship was in orbit off-planet got in. It'll be a barbecue, of
course, and--"

"Barbecued supercow! Yipeee!" Hoddy yelled. "What I been waitin' for for
five years!"

It would be the vilest cruelty not to take him along, I thought. And it
would also keep him and Stonehenge apart for a while.

"But we must hurry, Mr. Ambassador," Thrombley was saying. "If you will
change, now, to formal dress ..."

And he was looking at me, gasping. I think it was the first time he had
actually seen what I was wearing.

"In native dress, Mr. Ambassador!"

Thrombley's eyes and tone were again those of an innocent spaniel caught
in the middle of a marital argument.

Then his gaze fell to my belt and his eyes became saucers. "Oh, dear!
And armed!"

My chargé d'affaires was shuddering and he could not look directly at
me.

"Mr. Ambassador, I understand that you were recently appointed from the
Consular Service. I sincerely hope that you will not take it amiss if I
point out, here in private, that--"

"Mr. Thrombley, I am wearing this costume and these pistols on the
direct order of Secretary of State Ghopal Singh."

That set him back on his heels.

"I ... I can't believe it!" he exclaimed. "An ambassador is _never_
armed."

"Not when he's dealing with a government which respects the comity of
nations and the usages of diplomatic practice, no," I replied. "But the
fate of Mr. Cumshaw clearly indicates that the government of New Texas
is not such a government. These pistols are in the nature of a
not-too-subtle hint of the manner in which this government, here, is
being regarded by the government of the Solar League." I turned to
Stonehenge. "Commander, what sort of an Embassy guard have we?" I asked.

"Space Marines, sergeant and five men. I double as guard officer, sir."

"Very well. Mr. Thrombley insists that it is necessary for me to go to
this fish-fry or whatever it is immediately. I want two men, a driver
and an auto-rifleman, for my car. And from now on, I would suggest,
Commander, that you wear your sidearm at all times outside the Embassy."

"Yes, sir!" and this time, Stonehenge gave me a real salute.

"Well, I must phone the Statehouse, then," Thrombley said. "We will have
to call on Secretary of State Palme, and then on President Hutchinson."

With that, he got up, excused himself, motioned Gomez to follow, and
hurried away.

I got up, too, and motioned Stonehenge aside.

"Aboard ship, coming in, I was told that there's a task force of the
Space Navy on maneuvers about five light-years from here," I said.

"Yes, sir. Task Force Red-Blue-Green, Fifth Space Fleet. Fleet Admiral
Sir Rodney Tregaskis."

"Can we get hold of a fast space-boat, with hyperdrive engines, in a
hurry?"

"Eight or ten of them always around New Austin spaceport, available for
charter."

"All right; charter one and get out to that fleet. Tell Admiral
Tregaskis that the Ambassador at New Austin feels in need of protection;
possibility of z'Srauff invasion. I'll give you written orders. I want
the Fleet within radio call. How far out would that be, with our
facilities?"

"The Embassy radio isn't reliable beyond about sixty light-minutes,
sir."

"Then tell Sir Rodney to bring his fleet in that close. The invasion, if
it comes, will probably not come from the direction of the z'Srauff
star-cluster; they'll probably jump past us and move in from the other
side. I hope you don't think I'm having nightmares, Commander. Danger of
a z'Srauff invasion was pointed out to me by persons on the very highest
level, on Luna."

Stonehenge nodded. "I'm always having the same kind of nightmares, sir.
Especially since this special envoy arrived here, ostensibly to
negotiate a meteor-mining treaty." He hesitated for a moment. "We don't
want the New Texans to know, of course, that you've sent for the fleet?"

"Naturally not."

"Well, if I can wait till about midnight before I leave, I can get a
boat owned, manned and operated by Solar League people. The boat's a
dreadful-looking old tub, but she's sound and fast. The gang who own her
are pretty notorious characters--suspected of smuggling, piracy, and
what not--but they'll keep their mouths shut if well paid."

"Then pay them well," I said. "And it's just as well you're not leaving
at once. When I get back from this clambake, I'll want to have a general
informal council, and I certainly want you in on it."

On the way to the Statehouse in the aircar, I kept wondering just how
smart I had been.

I was pretty sure that the z'Srauff was getting ready for a sneak attack
on New Texas, and, as Solar League Ambassador, I of course had the right
to call on the Space Navy for any amount of armed protection.

Sending Stonehenge off on what couldn't be less than an eighteen-hour
trip would delay anything he and Hoddy might be cooking up, too.

On the other hand, with the fleet so near, they might decide to have me
rubbed out in a hurry, to justify seizing the planet ahead of the
z'Srauff.

I was in that pleasant spot called, "Damned if you do and damned if you
don't...."




CHAPTER IV


The Statehouse appeared to cover about a square mile of ground and it
was an insane jumble of buildings piled beside and on top of one
another, as though it had been in continuous construction ever since the
planet was colonized, eighty-odd years before.

At what looked like one of the main entrances, the car stopped. I told
our Marine driver and auto-rifleman to park the car and take in the
barbecue, but to leave word with the doorman where they could be found.
Hoddy, Thrombley and I then went in, to be met by a couple of New Texas
Rangers, one of them the officer who had called at the Embassy. They
guided us to the office of the Secretary of State.

"We're dreadfully late," Thrombley was fretting. "I do hope we haven't
kept the Secretary waiting too long."

From the looks of him, I was afraid we had. He jumped up from his desk
and hurried across the room as soon as the receptionist opened the door
for us, his hand extended.

"Good afternoon, Mr. Thrombley," he burbled nervously. "And this is the
new Ambassador, I suppose. And this--" He caught sight of Hoddy Ringo,
bringing up the rear and stopped short, hand flying to open mouth. "Oh,
dear me!"

So far, I had been building myself a New Texas stereotype from Hoddy
Ringo and the Ranger officer who had chased us to the Embassy. But this
frightened little rabbit of a fellow simply didn't fit it. An alien
would be justified in assigning him to an entirely different species.

Thrombley introduced me. I introduced Hoddy as my confidential secretary
and advisor. We all shook hands, and Thrombley dug my credentials out of
his briefcase and handed them to me, and I handed them to the Secretary
of State, Mr. William A. Palme. He barely glanced at them, then shook my
hand again fervently and mumbled something about "inexpressible
pleasure" and "entirely acceptable to my government."

That made me the accredited and accepted Ambassador to New Texas.

Mr. Palme hoped, or said he hoped, that my stay in New Texas would be
long and pleasant. He seemed rather less than convinced that it would
be. His eyes kept returning in horrified fascination to my belt. Each
time they would focus on the butts of my Krupp-Tattas, he would pull
them resolutely away again.

"And now, we must take you to President Hutchinson; he is most anxious
to meet you, Mr. Silk. If you will please come with me ..."

Four or five Rangers who had been loitering the hall outside moved to
follow us as we went toward the elevator. Although we had come into the
building onto a floor only a few feet above street-level, we went down
three floors from the hallway outside the Secretary of State's office,
into a huge room, the concrete floor of which was oil-stained, as
though vehicles were continually being driven in and out. It was about a
hundred feet wide, and two or three hundred in length. Daylight was
visible through open doors at the end. As we approached them, the
Rangers fanning out on either side and in front of us, I could hear a
perfect bedlam of noise outside--shouting, singing, dance-band music,
interspersed with the banging of shots.

When we reached the doors at the end, we emerged into one end of a big
rectangular plaza, at least five hundred yards in length. Most of the
uproar was centered at the opposite end, where several thousand people,
in costumes colored through the whole spectrum, were milling about.
There seemed to be at least two square-dances going on, to the music of
competing bands. At the distant end of the plaza, over the heads of the
crowd, I could see the piles and tracks of an overhead crane, towering
above what looked like an open-hearth furnace. Between us and the bulk
of the crowd, in a cleared space, two medium tanks, heavily padded with
mats, were ramming and trying to overturn each other, the mob of
spectators crowding as close to them as they dared. The din was
positively deafening, though we were at least two hundred yards from the
center of the crowd.

"Oh, dear, I always dread these things!" Palme was saying.

"Yes, absolutely anything could happen," Thrombley twittered.

"Man, this is a real barbecue!" Hoddy gloated. "Now I really feel at
home!"

"Over this way, Mr. Silk," Palme said, guiding me toward the short end
of the plaza, on our left. "We will see the President and then ..."

He gulped.

"... then we will all go to the barbecue."

In the center of the short end of the plaza, dwarfed by the monster
bulks of steel and concrete and glass around it, stood a little old
building of warm-tinted adobe. I had never seen it before, but somehow
it was familiar-looking. And then I remembered. Although I had never
seen it before, I had seen it pictured many times; pictured under
attack, with gunsmoke spouting from windows and parapets.

I plucked Thrombley's sleeve.

"Isn't that a replica of the Alamo?"

He was shocked. "Oh, dear, Mr. Ambassador, don't let anybody hear you
ask that. That's no replica. It _is_ the Alamo. _The_ Alamo."

I stood there a moment, looking at it. I was remembering, and finally
understanding, what my psycho-history lessons about the "Romantic
Freeze" had meant.

_They had taken this little mission-fort down, brick by adobe brick,
loaded it carefully into a spaceship, brought it here, forty two
light-years away from Terra, and reverently set it up again. Then they
had built a whole world and a whole social philosophy around it_.

It had been the dissatisfied, of course, the discontented, the dreamers,
who had led the vanguard of man's explosion into space following the
discovery of the hyperspace-drive. They had gone from Terra cherishing
dreams of things that had been dumped into the dust bin of history,
carrying with them pictures of ways of life that had passed away, or
that had never really been. Then, in their new life, on new planets,
they had set to work making those dreams and those pictures live.

And, many times, they had come close to succeeding.

These Texans, now: they had left behind the cold fact that it had been
their state's great industrial complex that had made their migration
possible. They ignored the fact that their life here on Capella IV was
possible only by application of modern industrial technology. That rodeo
down the plaza--tank-tilting instead of bronco-busting. Here they were,
living frozen in a romantic dream, a world of roving cowboys and ranch
kingdoms.

No wonder Hoddy hadn't liked the books I had been reading on the ship.
They shook the fabric of that dream.

There were people moving about, at this relatively quiet end of the
plaza, mostly in the direction of the barbecue. Ten or twelve Rangers
loitered at the front of the Alamo, and with them I saw the dress blues
of my two Marines. There was a little three-wheeled motorcart among
them, from which they were helping themselves to food and drink. When
they saw us coming, the two Marines shoved their sandwiches into the
hands of a couple of Rangers and tried to come to attention.

"At ease, at ease," I told them. "Have a good time, boys. Hoddy, you
better get in on some of this grub; I may be inside for quite a while."

As soon as the Rangers saw Hoddy, they hastily got things out of their
right hands. Hoddy grinned at them.

"Take it easy, boys," he said. "I'm protected by the game laws. I'm a
diplomat, I am."

There were a couple of Rangers lounging outside the door of the
President's office and both of them carried autorifles, implying things
I didn't like.

I had seen the President of the Solar League wandering around the
dome-city of Artemis unattended, looking for all the world like a
professor in his academic halls. Since then, maybe before then, I had
always had a healthy suspicion of governments whose chiefs had to
surround themselves with bodyguards.

But the President of New Texas, John Hutchinson, was alone in his office
when we were shown in. He got up and came around his desk to greet us, a
slender, stoop-shouldered man in a black-and-gold laced jacket. He had a
narrow compressed mouth and eyes that seemed to be watching every corner
of the room at once. He wore a pair of small pistols in cross-body
holsters under his coat, and he always kept one hand or the other close
to his abdomen.

He was like, and yet unlike, the Secretary of State. Both had the look
of hunted animals; but where Palme was a rabbit, twitching to take
flight at the first whiff of danger, Hutchinson was a cat who hears
hounds baying--ready to run if he could, or claw if he must.

"Good day, Mr. Silk," he said, shaking hands with me after the
introductions. "I see you're heeled; you're smart. You wouldn't be here
today if poor Silas Cumshaw'd been as smart as you are. Great man,
though; a wise and farseeing statesman. He and I were real friends."

"You know who Mr. Silk brought with him as bodyguard?" Palme asked.
"Hoddy Ringo!"

"Oh, my God! I thought this planet was rid of him!" The President turned
to me. "You got a good trigger-man, though, Mr. Ambassador. Good man to
watch your back for you. But lot of folks here won't thank you for
bringing him back to New Texas."

He looked at his watch. "We have time for a little drink, before we go
outside, Mr. Silk," he said. "Care to join me?"

I assented and he got a bottle of superbourbon out of his desk, with
four glasses. Palme got some water tumblers and brought the pitcher of
ice-water from the cooler.

I noticed that the New Texas Secretary of State filled his three-ounce
liquor glass to the top and gulped it down at once. He might act as
though he were descended from a long line of maiden aunts, but he took
his liquor in blasts that would have floored a spaceport labor-boss.

We had another drink, a little slower, and chatted for a while, and then
Hutchinson said, regretfully that we'd have to go outside and meet the
folks. Outside, our guards--Hoddy, the two Marines, the Rangers who had
escorted us from Palme's office, and Hutchinson's retinue--surrounded
us, and we made our way down the plaza, through the crowd. The
din--ear-piercing yells, whistles, cowbells, pistol shots, the cacophony
of the two dance-bands, and the chorus-singing, of which I caught only
the words: _The skies of freedom are above you!_--was as bad as New
Year's Eve in Manhattan or Nairobi or New Moscow, on Terra.

"Don't take all this as a personal tribute, Mr. Silk!" Hutchinson
screamed into my ear. "On this planet, to paraphrase Nietzsche, a good
barbecue halloweth any cause!"

That surprised me, at the moment. Later I found out that John Hutchinson
was one of the leading scholars on New Texas and had once been president
of one of their universities. New Texas Christian, I believe.

As we got up onto the platform, close enough to the barbecue pits to
feel the heat from them, somebody let off what sounded like a fifty-mm
anti-tank gun five or six times. Hutchinson grabbed a microphone and
bellowed into it: "Ladies and gentlemen! Your attention, please!"

The noise began to diminish, slowly, until I could hear one voice, in
the crowd below:

"Shut up, you damn fools! We can't eat till this is over!"

Hutchinson introduced me, in very few words. I gathered that lengthy
speeches at barbecues were not popular on New Texas.

"Ladies and gentlemen!" I yelled into the microphone. "Appreciative as I
am of this honor, there is one here who is more deserving of your notice
than I; one to whom I, also, pay homage. He's over there on the fire,
and I want a slice of him as soon as possible!"

That got a big ovation. There was, beside the water pitcher, a bottle of
superbourbon. I ostentatiously threw the water out of the glass, poured
a big shot of the corrosive stuff, and downed it.

"For God's sake, let's eat!" I finished. Then I turned to Thrombley, who
was looking like a priest who has just seen the bishop spit in the
holy-water font. "Stick close to me," I whispered. "Cue me in on the
local notables, and the other members of the Diplomatic Corps." Then we
all got down off the platform, and a band climbed up and began playing
one of those raucous "cowboy ballads" which had originated in Manhattan
about the middle of the Twentieth Century.

"The sandwiches'll be here in a moment, Mr. Ambassador," Hutchinson
screamed--in effect, whispered--in my ear. "Don't feel any reluctance
about shaking hands with a sandwich in your other hand; that's standard
practice, here. You struck just the right note, up there. That business
with the liquor was positively inspired!"

The sandwiches--huge masses of meat and hot relish, wrapped in tortillas
of some sort--arrived and I bit into one.

I'd been eating supercow all my life, frozen or electron-beamed for
transportation, and now I was discovering that I had never really eaten
supercow before. I finished the first sandwich in surprisingly short
order and was starting on my second when the crowd began coming.

First, the Diplomatic Corps, the usual collection of weirdies, human and
otherwise....

There was the Ambassador from Tara, in a suit of what his planet
produced as a substitute for Irish homespuns. His Embassy, if it was
like the others I had seen elsewhere, would be an outsize cottage with
whitewashed walls and a thatched roof, with a bowl of milk outside the
door for the Little People ...

The Ambassador from Alpheratz II, the South African Nationalist planet,
with a full beard, and old fashioned plug hat and tail-coat. They were a
frustrated lot. They had gone into space to practice _apartheid_ and had
settled on a planet where there was no other intelligent race to be
superior to....

The Mormon Ambassador from Deseret--Delta Camelopardalis V....

The Ambassador from Spica VII, a short jolly-looking little fellow, with
a head like a seal's, long arms, short legs and a tail like a
kangaroo's....

The Ambassador from Beta Cephus VI, who could have passed for human if
he hadn't had blood with a copper base instead of iron. His skin was a
dark green and his hair was a bright blue....

I was beginning to correct my first impression that Thrombley was a
complete dithering fool. He stood at my left elbow, whispering the names
and governments and home planets of the Ambassadors as they came up,
handing me little slips of paper on which he had written phonetically
correct renditions of the greetings I would give them in their own
language. I was still twittering a reply to the greeting of
Nanadabadian, from Beta Cephus VI, when he whispered to me:

"Here it comes, sir. The z'Srauff!"

The z'Srauff were reasonably close to human stature and appearance,
allowing for the fact that their ancestry had been canine instead of
simian. They had, of course, longer and narrower jaws than we have, and
definitely carnivorous teeth.

There were stories floating around that they enjoyed barbecued Terran
even better than they did supercow and hot relish.

This one advanced, extending his three-fingered hand.

"I am most happy to make connection with Solar League representative,"
he said. "I am named Gglafrr Ddespttann Vuvuvu."

No wonder Thrombley let him introduce himself. I answered in the Basic
English that was all he'd admit to understanding:

"The name of your great nation has gone before you to me. The stories we
tell to our young of you are at the top of our books. I have hope to
make great pleasure in you and me to be friends."

Gglafrr Vuvuvu's smile wavered a little at the oblique reference to the
couple of trouncings our Space Navy had administered to z'Srauff ships
in the past. "We will be in the same place again times with no number,"
the alien replied. "I have hope for you that time you are in this place
will be long and will put pleasure in your heart."

Then the pressure of the line behind him pushed him on. Cabinet Members;
Senators and Representatives; prominent citizens, mostly Judge
so-and-so, or Colonel this-or-that. It was all a blur, so much so that
it was an instant before I recognized the gleaming golden hair and the
statuesque figure.

"Thank you! I have met the Ambassador." The lovely voice was shaking
with restrained anger.

"Gail!" I exclaimed.

"Your father coming to the barbecue, Gail?" President Hutchinson was
asking.

"He ought to be here any minute. He sent me on ahead from the hotel. He
wants to meet the Ambassador. That's why I joined the line."

"Well, suppose I leave Mr. Silk in your hands for a while," Hutchinson
said. "I ought to circulate around a little."

"Yes. Just leave him in my hands!" she said vindictively.

"What's wrong, Gail?" I wanted to know. "I know, I was supposed to meet
you at the spaceport, but--"

"You made a beautiful fool of me at the spaceport!"

"Look, I can explain everything. My Embassy staff insisted on hurrying
me off--"

Somebody gave a high-pitched whoop directly behind me and emptied the
clip of a pistol. I couldn't even hear what else I said. I couldn't hear
what she said, either, but it was something angry.

"You have to listen to me!" I roared in her ear. "I can explain
everything!"

"Any diplomat can explain anything!" she shouted back.

"Look, Gail, you're hanging an innocent man!" I yelled back at her. "I'm
entitled to a fair trial!"

Somebody on the platform began firing his pistol within inches of the
loud-speakers and it sounded like an H-bomb going off. She grabbed my
wrist and dragged me toward a door under the platform.

"Down here!" she yelled. "And this better be good, Mr. Silk!"

We went down a spiral ramp, lighted by widely-scattered overhead lights.

"Space-attack shelter," she explained. "And look: what goes on in
space-ships is one thing, but it's as much as a girl's reputation is
worth to come down here during a barbecue."

There seemed to be quite few girls at that barbecue who didn't care what
happened to their reputations. We discovered that after looking into a
couple of passageways that branched off the entrance.

"Over this way," Gail said, "Confederate Courts Building. There won't be
anything going on over here, now."

I told her, with as much humorous detail as possible, about how
Thrombley had shanghaied me to the Embassy, and about the chase by the
Rangers. Before I was half through, she was laughing heartily, all
traces of her anger gone. Finally, we came to a stairway, and at the
head of it to a small door.

"It's been four years that I've been away from here," she said. "I think
there's a reading room of the Law Library up here. Let's go in and enjoy
the quiet for a while."

But when we opened the door, there was a Ranger standing inside.

"Come to see a trial, Mr. Silk? Oh, hello, Gail. Just in time; they're
going to prepare for the next trial."

As he spoke, something clicked at the door. Gail looked at me in
consternation.

"Now we're locked in," she said. "We can't get out till the
trial's over."




CHAPTER V


I looked around.

We were on a high balcony, at the end of a long, narrow room. In front
of us, windows rose to the ceiling, and it was evident that the floor of
the room was about twenty feet below ground level. Outside, I could see
the barbecue still going on, but not a murmur of noise penetrated to us.
What seemed to be the judge's bench was against the outside wall, under
the tall windows. To the right of it was a railed stand with a chair in
it, and in front, arranged in U-shape, were three tables at which a
number of men were hastily conferring. There were nine judges in a row
on the bench, all in black gowns. The spectators' seats below were
filled with people, and there were quite a few up here on the balcony.

"What is this? Supreme Court?" I asked as Gail piloted me to a couple of
seats where we could be alone.

"No, Court of Political Justice," she told me. "This is the court that's
going to try those three Bonney brothers, who killed Mr. Cumshaw."

It suddenly occurred to me that this was the first time I had heard
anything specific about the death of my predecessor.

"That isn't the trial that's going on now, I hope?"

"Oh, no; that won't be for a couple of days. Not till after you can
arrange to attend. I don't know what this trial is. I only got home
today, myself."

"What's the procedure here?" I wanted to know.

"Well, those nine men are judges," she began. "The one in the middle is
President Judge Nelson. You've met his son--the Ranger officer who
chased you from the spaceport. He's a regular jurist. The other eight
are prominent citizens who are drawn from a panel, like a jury. The men
at the table on the left are the prosecution: friends of the politician
who was killed. And the ones on the right are the defense: they'll try
to prove that the dead man got what was coming to him. The ones in the
middle are friends of the court: they're just anybody who has any
interest in the case--people who want to get some point of law cleared
up, or see some precedent established, or something like that."

"You seem to assume that this is a homicide case," I mentioned.

"They generally are. Sometimes mayhem, or wounding, or simple assault,
but--"

There had been some sort of conference going on in the open space of
floor between the judges' bench and the three tables. It broke up, now,
and the judge in the middle rapped with his gavel.

"Are you gentlemen ready?" he asked. "All right, then. Court of
Political Justice of the Confederate Continents of New Texas is now in
session. Case of the friends of S. Austin Maverick, deceased, late of
James Bowie Continent, versus Wilbur Whately."

"My God, did somebody finally kill Aus Maverick?" Gail whispered.

On the center table, in front of the friends of the court, both sides
seemed to have piled their exhibits; among the litter I saw some torn
clothing, a big white sombrero covered with blood, and a long machete.

"The general nature of the case," the judge was saying, "is that the
defendant, Wilbur Whately, of Sam Houston Continent, is here charged
with divers offenses arising from the death of the Honorable S. Austin
Maverick, whom he killed on the front steps of the Legislative Assembly
Building, here in New Austin...."

_What goes on here?_ I thought angrily. _This is the rankest instance of
a pre-judged case I've ever seen._ I started to say as much to Gail, but
she hushed me.

"I want to hear the specifications," she said.

A man at the prosecution table had risen.

"Please the court," he began, "the defendant, Wilbur Whately, is here
charged with political irresponsibility and excessive atrocity in
exercising his constitutional right of criticism of a practicing
politician.

"The specifications are, as follows: That, on the afternoon of May
Seventh, Anno Domini 2193, the defendant here present did arm himself
with a machete, said machete not being one of his normal and accustomed
weapons, and did loiter in wait on the front steps of the Legislative
Assembly Building in the city of New Austin, Continent of Sam Houston,
and did approach the decedent, addressing him in abusive, obscene, and
indecent language, and did set upon and attack him with the machete
aforesaid, causing the said decedent, S. Austin Maverick, to die."

The court wanted to know how the defendant would plead. Somebody,
without bothering to rise, said, "Not guilty, Your Honor," from the
defense table.

There was a brief scraping of chairs; four of five men from the defense
and the prosecution tables got up and advanced to confer in front of the
bench, comparing sheets of paper. The man who had read the charges,
obviously the chief prosecutor, made himself the spokesman.

"Your Honor, defense and prosecution wish to enter the following
stipulations: That the decedent was a practicing politician within the
meaning of the Constitution, that he met his death in the manner stated
in the coroner's report, and that he was killed by the defendant, Wilbur
Whately."

"Is that agreeable to you, Mr. Vincent?" the judge wanted to know.

The defense answered affirmatively. I sat back, gaping like a fool. Why,
that was practically--no, it _was_--a confession.

"All right, gentlemen," the judge said. "Now we have all that out of the
way, let's get on with the case."

As though there were any case to get on with! I fully expected them to
take it on from there in song, words by Gilbert and music by Sullivan.

"Well, Your Honor, we have a number of character witnesses," the
prosecution--prosecution, for God's sake!--announced.

"Skip them," the defense said. "We stipulate."

"But you can't stipulate character testimony," the prosecution argued.
"You don't know what our witnesses are going to testify to."

"Sure we do: they're going to give us a big long shaggy-dog story about
the Life and Miracles of Saint Austin Maverick. We'll agree in advance
to all that; this case is concerned only with his record as a
politician. And as he spent the last fifteen years in the Senate, that's
all a matter of public record. I assume that the prosecution is going to
introduce all that, too?"

"Well, naturally ..." the prosecutor began.

"Including his public acts on the last day of his life?" the counsel for
the defense demanded. "His actions on the morning of May seventh as
chairman of the Finance and Revenue Committee? You going to introduce
that as evidence for the prosecution?"

"Well, now ..." the prosecutor began.

"Your Honor, we ask to have a certified copy of the proceedings of the
Senate Finance and Revenue Committee for the morning of May Seventh,
2193, read into the record of this court," the counsel for the defense
said. "And thereafter, we rest our case."

"Has the prosecution anything to say before we close the court?" Judge
Nelson inquired.

"Well, Your Honor, this seems ... that is, we ought to hear both sides
of it. My old friend, Aus Maverick, was really a fine man; he did a lot
of good for the people of his continent...."

"Yeah, we'd of lynched him, when he got back, if somebody hadn't chopped
him up here in New Austin!" a voice from the rear of the courtroom broke
in.

The prosecution hemmed and hawed for a moment, and then announced, in a
hasty mumble, that it rested.

"I will now close the court," Judge Nelson said. "I advise everybody to
keep your seats. I don't think it's going to be closed very long."

And then, he actually closed the court; pressing a button on the bench,
he raised a high black screen in front of him and his colleagues. It
stayed up for some sixty seconds, and then dropped again.

"The Court of Political Justice has reached a verdict," he announced.
"Wilbur Whately, and your attorney, approach and hear the verdict."

The defense lawyer motioned a young man who had been sitting beside him
to rise. In the silence that had fallen, I could hear the defendant's
boots squeaking as he went forward to hear his fate. The judge picked up
a belt and a pair of pistols that had been lying in front of him.

"Wilbur Whately," he began, "this court is proud to announce that you
have been unanimously acquitted of the charge of political
irresponsibility, and of unjustified and excessive atrocity.

"There was one dissenting vote on acquitting you of the charge of
political irresponsibility; one of the associate judges felt that the
late unmitigated scoundrel, Austin Maverick, ought to have been skinned
alive, an inch at a time. You are, however, acquitted of that charge,
too.

"You all know," he continued, addressing the entire assemblage, "the
reason for which this young hero cut down that monster of political
iniquity, S. Austin Maverick. On the very morning of his justly-merited
death, Austin Maverick, using the powers of his political influence,
rammed through the Finance and Revenue Committee a bill entitled 'An Act
for the Taxing of Personal Incomes, and for the Levying of a Withholding
Tax.' Fellow citizens, words fail me to express my horror of this
diabolic proposition, this proposed instrument of tyrannical extortion,
borrowed from the Dark Ages of the Twentieth Century! Why, if this young
nobleman had not taken his blade in hand, I'd have killed the
sonofabitch, myself!"

He leaned forward, extending the belt and holsters to the defendant.

"I therefore restore to you your weapons, taken from you when, in
compliance with the law, you were formally arrested. Buckle them on,
and, assuming your weapons again, go forth from this court a free man,
Wilbur Whately. And take with you that machete with which you vindicated
the liberties and rights of all New Texans. Bear it reverently to your
home, hang it among your lares and penates, cherish it, and dying,
mention it within your will, bequeathing it as a rich legacy unto your
issue! Court adjourned; next session 0900 tomorrow. For Chrissake, let's
get out of here before the barbecue's over!"

Some of the spectators, drooling for barbecued supercow, began crowding
and jostling toward the exits; more of them were pushing to the front of
the courtroom, cheering and waving their hip-flasks. The prosecution
and about half of the friends of the court hastily left by a side door,
probably to issue statements disassociating themselves from the deceased
Maverick.

"So that's the court that's going to try the men who killed Ambassador
Cumshaw," I commented, as Gail and I went out. "Why, the purpose of that
court seems to be to acquit murderers."

"Murderers?" She was indignant. "That wasn't murder. He just killed a
politician. All the court could do was determine whether or not the
politician needed it, and while I never heard about Maverick's
income-tax proposition, I can't see how they could have brought in any
other kind of a verdict. Of all the outrageous things!"


I was thoughtfully silent as we went out into the plaza, which was still
a riot of noise and polychromatic costumes. And my thoughts were as
weltered as the scene before me.

Apparently, on New Texas, killing a politician wasn't regarded as
_mallum in se_, and was _mallum prohibitorum_ only to the extent that
what happened to the politician was in excess of what he deserved. I
began to understand why Palme was such a scared rabbit, why Hutchinson
had that hunted look and kept his hands always within inches of his
pistols.

I began to feel more pity than contempt for Thrombley, too. _He's been
on this planet too long and he should never have been sent here in the
first place. I'll rotate him home as soon as possible...._

Then the full meaning of what I had seen finally got through to me: if
they were going to try the killers of Cumshaw in that court, that meant
that on New Texas, foreign diplomats were regarded as practicing
politicians....

That made me a practicing politician too!

And that's why, when we got back to the vicinity of the bandstand, I
had my right hand close to my pistol, with my thumb on the inconspicuous
little spot of silver inlay that operated the secret holster mechanism.

I saw Hutchinson and Palme and Thrombley ahead. With them was a
newcomer, a portly, ruddy-faced gentleman with a white mustache and
goatee, dressed in a white suit. Gail broke away from me and ran toward
him. This, I thought, would be her father; now I would be introduced and
find out just what her last name was. I followed, more slowly, and saw a
waiter, with a wheeled serving-table, move in behind the group which she
had joined.

So I saw what none of them did--the waiter suddenly reversed his long
carving-knife and poised himself for a blow at President Hutchinson's
back. I simply pressed the little silver stud on my belt, the
Krupp-Tatta popped obediently out of the holster into my open hand. I
thumbed off the safety and swung up; when my sights closed on the rising
hand that held the knife, I fired.

Hoddy Ringo, who had been holding a sandwich with one hand and a drink
with the other, dropped both and jumped on the man whose hand I had
smashed. A couple of Rangers closed in and grabbed him, also. The group
around President Hutchinson had all turned and were staring from me to
the man I had shot, and from him to the knife with the broken handle,
lying on the ground.

Hutchinson spoke first. "Well, Mr. Ambassador! My Government thanks your
Government! That was nice shooting!"

"Hey, you been holdin' out on me!" Hoddy accused. "I never knew you was
that kinda gunfighter!"

"There's a new wrinkle," the man with the white goatee said. "We'll have
to screen the help at these affairs a little more closely." He turned to
me. "Mr. Ambassador, New Texas owes you a great deal for saving the
President's life. If you'll get that pistol out of your hand, I'd be
proud to shake it, sir."

I holstered my automatic, and took his hand. Gail was saying, "Stephen,
this is my father," and at the same time, Palme, the Secretary of State,
was doing it more formally:

"Ambassador Silk, may I present one of our leading citizens and large
ranchers, Colonel Andrew Jackson Hickock."

Dumbarton Oaks had taught me how to maintain the proper diplomat's
unchanging expression; drinking superbourbon had been a post-graduate
course. I needed that training as I finally learned Gail's last name.




CHAPTER VI


It was early evening before we finally managed to get away from the
barbecue. Thrombley had called the Embassy and told them not to wait
dinner for us, so the staff had finished eating and were relaxing in the
patio when our car came in through the street gate. Stonehenge and
another man came over to meet us as we got out--a man I hadn't met
before.

He was a little fellow, half-Latin, half-Oriental; in New Texas costume
and wearing a pair of pistols like mine, in State Department Special
Services holsters. He didn't look like a Dumbarton Oaks product: I
thought he was more likely an alumnus of some private detective agency.

"Mr. Francisco Parros, our Intelligence man," Stonehenge introduced him.

"Sorry I wasn't here when you arrived, Mr. Silk," Parros said. "Out
checking on some things. But I saw that bit of shooting, on the telecast
screen in a bar over town. You know, there was a camera right over the
bandstand that caught the whole thing--you and Miss Hickock coming
toward the President and his party, Miss Hickock running forward to her
father, the waiter going up behind Hutchinson with the knife, and then
that beautiful draw and snap shot. They ran it again a couple of times
on the half-hourly newscast. Everybody in New Austin, maybe on New
Texas, is talking about it, now."

"Yes, indeed, sir," Gomez, the Embassy Secretary, said, joining us.
"You've made yourself more popular in the eight hours since you landed
than poor Mr. Cumshaw had been able to do in the ten years he spent
here. But, I'm afraid, sir, you've given me a good deal of work,
answering your fan-mail."

We went over and sat down at one of the big tables under the arches at
the side of the patio.

"Well, that's all to the good," I said. "I'm going to need a lot of
local good will, in the next few weeks. No thanks, Mr. Parros," I added,
as the Intelligence man picked up a bottle and made to pour for me.
"I've been practically swimming in superbourbon all afternoon. A little
black coffee, if you don't mind. And now, gentlemen, if you'll all be
seated, we'll see what has to be done."

"A council of war, in effect, Mr. Ambassador?" Stonehenge inquired.

"Let's call it a council to estimate the situation. But I'll have to
find out from you first exactly what the situation here is."

Thrombley stirred uneasily. "But sir, I confess that I don't understand.
Your briefing on Luna...."

"Was practically nonexistent. I had a total of six hours to get aboard
ship, from the moment I was notified that I had been appointed to this
Embassy."

"Incredible!" Thrombley murmured.

I wondered what he'd say if I told him that I thought it was
deliberate.

"Naturally, I spent some time on the ship reading up on this planet, but
I know practically nothing about what's been going on here in, say, the
last year. And all I know about the death of Mr. Cumshaw is that he is
said to have been killed by three brothers named Bonney."

"So you'll want just about everything, Mr. Silk," Thrombley said.
"Really, I don't know where to begin."

"Start with why and how Mr. Cumshaw was killed. The rest, I believe,
will key into that."

So they began; Thrombley, Stonehenge and Parros doing the talking. It
came to this:

Ever since we had first established an Embassy on New Texas, the goal of
our diplomacy on this planet had been to secure it into the Solar
League. And it was a goal which seemed very little closer to realization
now than it had been twenty-three years before.

"You must know, by now, what politics on this planet are like, Mr.
Silk," Thrombley said.

"I have an idea. One Ambassador gone native, another gone crazy, the
third killed himself, the fourth murdered."

"Yes, indeed. I've been here fifteen years, myself...."

"That's entirely too long for anybody to be stationed in this place," I
told him. "If I'm not murdered, myself, in the next couple of weeks, I'm
going to see that you and any other member of this staff who's been here
over ten years are rotated home for a tour of duty at Department
Headquarters."

"Oh, would you, Mr. Silk? I would be so happy...."

Thrombley wasn't much in the way of an ally, but at least he had a
sound, selfish motive for helping me stay alive. I assured him I would
get him sent back to Luna, and then went on with the discussion.

Up until six months ago, Silas Cumshaw had modeled himself after the
typical New Texas politician. He had always worn at least two faces, and
had always managed to place himself on every side of every issue at
once. Nothing he ever said could possibly be construed as controversial.
Naturally, the cause of New Texan annexation to the Solar League had
made no progress whatever.

Then, one evening, at a banquet, he had executed a complete 180-degree
turn, delivering a speech in which he proclaimed that union with the
Solar League was the only possible way in which New Texans could retain
even a vestige of local sovereignty. He had talked about an invasion as
though the enemy's ships were already coming out of hyperspace, and had
named the invader, calling the z'Srauff "our common enemy." The z'Srauff
Ambassador, also present, had immediately gotten up and stalked out,
amid a derisive chorus of barking and baying from the New Texans. The
New Texans were first shocked and then wildly delighted; they had been
so used to hearing nothing but inanities and high-order abstractions
from their public figures that the Solar League Ambassador had become a
hero overnight.

"Sounds as though there is a really strong sentiment at what used to be
called the grass-roots level in favor of annexation," I commented.

"There is," Parros told me. "Of course, there is a very strong
isolationist, anti-annexation, sentiment, too. The sentiment in favor
of annexation is based on the point Mr. Cumshaw made--the danger of
conquest by the z'Srauff. Against that, of course, there is fear of
higher taxes, fear of loss of local sovereignty, fear of abrogation of
local customs and institutions, and chauvinistic pride."

"We can deal with some of that by furnishing guarantees of local
self-government; the emotional objections can be met by convincing them
that we need the great planet of New Texas to add glory and luster to
the Solar League," I said. "You think, then, that Mr. Cumshaw was
assassinated by opponents of annexation?"

"Of course, sir," Thrombley replied. "These Bonneys were only hirelings.
Here's what happened, on the day of the murder:

"It was the day after a holiday, a big one here on New Texas,
celebrating some military victory by the Texans on Terra, a battle
called San Jacinto. We didn't have any business to handle, because all
the local officials were home nursing hangovers, so when Colonel Hickock
called--"

"Who?" I asked sharply.

"Colonel Hickock. The father of the young lady you were so attentive to
at the barbecue. He and Mr. Cumshaw had become great friends, beginning
shortly before the speech the Ambassador made at that banquet. He called
about 0900, inviting Mr. Cumshaw out to his ranch for the day, and as
there was nothing in the way of official business, Mr. Cumshaw said he'd
be out by 1030.

"When he got there, there was an aircar circling about, near the
ranchhouse. As Mr. Cumshaw got out of his car and started up the front
steps, somebody in this car landed it on the driveway and began
shooting with a twenty-mm auto-rifle. Mr. Cumshaw was hit several times,
and killed instantly."

"The fellows who did the shooting were damned lucky," Stonehenge took
over. "Hickock's a big rancher. I don't know how much you know about
supercow-ranching, sir, but those things have to be herded with tanks
and light aircraft, so that every rancher has at his disposal a fairly
good small air-armor combat team. Naturally, all the big ranchers are
colonels in the Armed Reserve. Hickock has about fifteen fast fighters,
and thirty medium tanks armed with fifty-mm guns. He also has some
AA-guns around his ranch house--every once in a while, these ranchers
get to squabbling among themselves.

"Well, these three Bonney brothers were just turning away when a burst
from the ranch house caught their jet assembly, and they could only get
as far as Bonneyville, thirty miles away, before they had to land. They
landed right in front of the town jail.

"This Bonneyville's an awful shantytown; everybody in it is related to
everybody else. The mayor, for instance, Kettle-Belly Sam Bonney, is an
uncle of theirs.

"These three boys--Switchblade Joe Bonney, Jack-High Abe Bonney and
Turkey-Buzzard Tom Bonney--immediately claimed sanctuary in the jail, on
the grounds that they had been near to--get that; I think that indicates
the line they're going to take at the trial--_near_ to a political
assassination. They were immediately given the protection of the jail,
which is about the only well-constructed building in the place,
practically a fort."

"You think that was planned in advance?" I asked.

Parros nodded emphatically. "I do. There was a hell of a big gang of
these Bonneys at the jail, almost the entire able-bodied population of
the place. As soon as Switchblade and Jack-High and Turkey-Buzzard
landed, they were rushed inside and all the doors barred. About three
minutes later, the Hickock outfit started coming in, first aircraft and
then armor. They gave that town a regular Georgie Patton style
blitzing."

"Yes. I'm only sorry I wasn't there to see it," Stonehenge put in. "They
knocked down or burned most of the shanties, and then they went to work
on the jail. The aircraft began dumping these firebombs and stun-bombs
that they use to stop supercow stampedes, and the tank-guns began to
punch holes in the walls. As soon as Kettle-Belly saw what he had on his
hands, he radioed a call for Ranger protection. Our friend Captain
Nelson went out to see what the trouble was."

"Yes. I got the story of that from Nelson," Parros put in. "Much as he
hated to do it, he had to protect the Bonneys. And as soon as he'd taken
a hand, Hickock had to call off his gang. But he was smart. He grabbed
everything relating to the killing--the aircar and the twenty-mm
auto-rifle in particular--and he's keeping them under cover. Very few
people know about that, or about the fact that on physical evidence
alone, he has the killing pinned on the Bonneys so well that they'll
never get away with this story of being merely innocent witnesses."

"The rest, Mr. Silk, is up to us," Thrombley said. "I have Colonel
Hickock's assurance that he will give us every assistance, but we simply
must see to it that those creatures with the outlandish names are
convicted."

I didn't have a chance to say anything to that: at that moment, one of
the servants ushered Captain Nelson toward us.

"Good evening, Captain," I greeted the Ranger. "Join us, seeing that
you're on foreign soil and consequently not on duty."

He sat down with us and poured a drink.

"I thought you might be interested," he said. "We gave that waiter a
going-over. We wanted to know who put him up to it. He tried to sell us
the line that he was a New Texan patriot, trying to kill a tyrant, but
we finally got the truth out of him. He was paid a thousand pesos to do
the job, by a character they call Snake-Eyes Sam Bonney. A cousin of the
three who killed Mr. Cumshaw."

"Nephew of Kettle-Belly Sam," Parros interjected. "You pick him up?"

Nelson shook his head disgustedly. "He's out in the high grass
somewhere. We're still looking for him. Oh, yes, and I just heard that
the trial of Switchblade, and Jack-High and Turkey-Buzzard is scheduled
for three days from now. You'll be notified in due form tomorrow, but I
thought you might like to know in advance."

"I certainly do, and thank you, Captain.... We were just talking about
you when you arrived," I mentioned. "About the arrest, or rescue, or
whatever you call it, of that trio."

"Yeah. One of the jobs I'm not particularly proud of. Pity Hickock's
boys didn't get hold of them before I got there. It'd of saved everybody
a lot of trouble."

"Just what impression did you get at the time, Captain?" I asked. "You
think Kettle-Belly knew in advance what they were going to do?"

"Sure he did. They had the whole jail fortified. Not like a jail usually
is, to keep people from getting out; but like a fort, to keep people
from getting in. There were no prisoners inside. I found out that they
had all been released that morning."

He stopped, seemed to be weighing his words, then continued, speaking
very slowly.

"Let me tell you first some things I can't testify to, couple of things
that I figure went wrong with their plans.

"One of Colonel Hickock's men was on the porch to greet Mr. Cumshaw and
he recognized the Bonneys. That was lucky; otherwise we might still be
lookin' and wonderin' who did the shootin', which might not have been
good for New Texas."

He cocked an eyebrow and I nodded. The Solar League, in similar cases,
had regarded such planetary governments as due for change without notice
and had promptly made the change.

"Number two," Captain Nelson continued, "that AA-shot which hit their
aircar. I don't think they intended to land at the jail--it was just
sort of a reserve hiding-hole. But because they'd been hit, they had to
land. And they'd been slowed down so much that they couldn't dispose of
the evidence before the Colonel's boys were tappin' on the door 'n'
askin', couldn't they come in."

"I gather the Colonel's task-force was becoming insistent," I prompted
him.

The big Ranger grinned. "Now we're on things I can testify to.

"When I got there, what had been the cell-block was on fire, and they
were trying to defend the mayor's office and the warden's office. These
Bonneys gave me the line that they'd been witnesses to the killing of
Mr. Cumshaw by Colonel Hickock and that the Hickock outfit was trying to
rub them out to keep them from testifying. I just laughed and started to
walk out. Finally, they confessed that they'd shot Mr. Cumshaw, but they
claimed it was right of action against political malfeasance. When they
did that, I had to take them in."

"They confessed to you, before you arrested them?" I wanted to be sure
of that point.

"That's right. I'm going to testify to that, Monday, when the trial is
held. And that ain't all: we got their fingerprints off the car, off the
gun, off some shells still in the clip, and we have the gun identified
to the shells that killed Mr. Cumshaw. We got their confession fully
corroborated."

I asked him if he'd give Mr. Parros a complete statement of what he'd
seen and heard at Bonneyville. He was more than willing and I suggested
that they go into Parros' office, where they'd be undisturbed. The
Ranger and my Intelligence man got up and took a bottle of superbourbon
with them. As they were leaving, Nelson turned to Hoddy, who was still
with us.

"You'll have to look to your laurels, Hoddy," Nelson said. "Your
Ambassador seems to be making quite a reputation for himself as a
gunfighter."

"Look," Hoddy said, and though he was facing Nelson, I felt he was
really talking to Stonehenge, "before I'd go up against this guy, I'd
shoot myself. That way, I could be sure I'd get a nice painless job."

After they were gone, I turned to Stonehenge and Thrombley. "This seems
to be a carefully prearranged killing."

They agreed.

"Then they knew _in advance_ that Mr. Cumshaw would be on Colonel
Hickock's front steps at about 1030. _How did they find that out?_"

"Why ... why, I'm sure I don't know," Thrombley said. It was most
obvious that the idea had never occurred to him before and a side glance
told me that the thought was new to Stonehenge also. "Colonel Hickock
called at 0900. Mr. Cumshaw left the Embassy in an aircar a few minutes
later. It took an hour and a half to fly out to the Hickock ranch...."

"I don't like the implications, Mr. Silk," Stonehenge said. "I can't
believe that was how it happened. In the first place, Colonel Hickock
isn't that sort of man: he doesn't use his hospitality to trap people to
their death. In the second place, he wouldn't have needed to use people
like these Bonneys. His own men would do anything for him. In the third
place, he is one of the leaders of the annexation movement here and this
was obviously an anti-annexation job. And in the fourth place--"

"Hold it!" I checked him. "Are you sure he's really on the annexation
side?"

He opened his mouth to answer me quickly, then closed it, waited a
moment, answered me slowly. "I can guess what you are thinking, Mr.
Silk. But, remember, when Colonel Hickock came here as our first
Ambassador, he came here as a man with a mission. He had studied the
problem and he believed in what he came for. He has never changed.

"Let me emphasize this, sir: we know he has never changed. For our own
protection, we've had to check on every real leader of the annexation
movement, screening them for crackpots who might do us more harm than
good. The Colonel is with us all the way.

"And now, in the fourth place, underlined by what I've just said, the
Colonel and Mr. Cumshaw were really friends."

"Now you're talking!" Hoddy burst in. "I've knowed A. J. ever since I
was a kid. Ever since he married old Colonel MacTodd's daughter. That
just ain't the way A. J. works!"

"On the other hand, Mr. Ambassador," Thrombley said, keeping his gaze
fixed on Hoddy's hands and apparently ready to both duck and shut up if
Hoddy moved a finger, "you will recall, I think, that Colonel Hickock
did do everything in his power to see that these Bonney brothers did not
reach court alive. And, let me add," he was getting bolder, tilting his
chin up a little, "it's a choice as simple as this: either Colonel
Hickock told them, or we have--and this is unbelievable--a traitor in
the Embassy itself."

That statement rocked even Hoddy. Even though he was probably no more
than one of Natalenko's little men, he still couldn't help knowing how
thoroughly we were screened, indoctrinated, and--let's face
it--mind-conditioned. A traitor among us was unthinkable because we just
couldn't think that way.

The silence, the sorrow, were palpable. Then I remembered, told them,
Hickock himself had been a Department man.

Stonehenge gripped his head between his hands and squeezed as if trying
to bring out an idea. "All right, Mr. Ambassador, where are we now?
Nobody who knew could have told the Bonney boys where Mr. Cumshaw would
be at 1030, yet the three men were there waiting for him. You take it
from there. I'm just a simple military man and I'm ready to go back to
the simple military life as soon as possible."

I turned to Gomez. "There could be an obvious explanation. Bring us the
official telescreen log. Let's see what calls were made. Maybe Mr.
Cumshaw himself said something to someone that gave his destination
away."

"That won't be necessary," Thrombley told me. "None of the junior clerks
were on duty, and I took the only three calls that came in, myself.
First, there was the call from Colonel Hickock. Then, the call about the
wrist watch. And then, a couple of hours later, the call from the
Hickock ranch, about Mr. Cumshaw's death."

"What was the call about the wrist watch?" I asked.

"Oh, that was from the z'Srauff Embassy," Thrombley said. "For some
time, Mr. Cumshaw had been trying to get one of the very precise
watches which the z'Srauff manufacture on their home planet. The
z'Srauff Ambassador called, that day, to tell him that they had one for
him and wanted to know when it was to be delivered. I told them the
Ambassador was out, and they wanted to know where they could call him
and I--"

I had never seen a man look more horror-stricken.

"Oh, my God! I'm the one who told them!"

What could I say? Not much, but I tried. "How could you know, Mr.
Thrombley? You did the natural, the normal, the proper thing, on a call
from one Ambassador to another."

I turned to the others, who, like me, preferred not to look at
Thrombley. "They must have had a spy outside who told them the
Ambassador had left the Embassy. Alone, right? And that was just what
they'd been waiting for.

"But what's this about the watch, though. There's more to this than a
simple favor from one Ambassador to another."

"My turn, Mr. Ambassador," Stonehenge interrupted. "Mr. Cumshaw had been
trying to get one of the things at my insistence. Naval Intelligence is
very much interested in them and we want a sample. The z'Srauff watches
are very peculiar--they're operated by radium decay, which, of course is
a universal constant. They're uniform to a tenth second and they're all
synchronized with the official time at the capital city of the principal
z'Srauff planet. The time used by the z'Srauff Navy."

Stonehenge deliberately paused, let that last phrase hang heavily in the
air for a moment, then he continued.

"They're supposed to be used in religious observances--timing hours of
prayer, I believe. They can, of course, have other uses.

"For example, I can imagine all those watches giving the wearer a light
electric shock, or ringing a little bell, all over New Texas, at exactly
the same moment. And then I can imagine all the z'Srauff running down
into nice deep holes in the ground."

He looked at his own watch. "And that reminds me: my gang of pirates are
at the spaceport by now, ready to blast off. I wonder if someone could
drive me there."

"I'll drive him, boss," Hoddy volunteered. "I ain't doin' nothin' else."

I was wondering how I could break that up, plausibly and without
betraying my suspicions, when Parros and Captain Nelson came out and
joined us.

"I have a lot of stuff here," Parros said. "Stuff we never seemed to
have noticed. For instance--"

I interrupted. "Commander Stonehenge's going to the spaceport, now," I
said. "Suppose you ride with him, and brief him on what you learned, on
the way. Then, when he's aboard, come back and tell us."

Hoddy looked at me for a long ten seconds. His expression started by
being exasperated and ended by betraying grudging admiration.




CHAPTER VII


The next morning, which was Saturday, I put Thrombley in charge of the
routine work of the Embassy, but first instructed him to answer all
inquiries about me with the statement, literally true, that I was too
immersed in work of clearing up matters left unfinished after the death
of the former Ambassador for any social activities. Then I called the
Hickock ranch in the west end of Sam Houston Continent, mentioning an
invitation the Colonel and his daughter had extended me, and told them I
would be out to see them before noon that same day. With Hoddy Ringo
driving the car, I arrived about 1000, and was welcomed by Gail and her
father, who had flown out the evening before, after the barbecue.

Hoddy, accompanied by a Ranger and one of Hickock's ranch hands, all
three disguised in shabby and grease-stained cast-offs borrowed at the
ranch, and driving a dilapidated aircar from the ranch junkyard, were
sent to visit the slum village of Bonneyville. They spent all day there,
posing as a trio of range tramps out of favor with the law.

I spent the day with Gail, flying over the range, visiting Hickock's
herd camps and slaughtering crews. It was a pleasant day and I managed
to make it constructive as well.

Because of their huge size--they ran to a live weight of around fifteen
tons--and their uncertain disposition, supercows are not really
domesticated. Each rancher owned the herds on his own land, chiefly by
virtue of constant watchfulness over them. There were always a couple of
helicopters hovering over each herd, with fast fighter planes waiting on
call to come in and drop fire-bombs or stun-bombs in front of them if
they showed a disposition to wander too far. Naturally, things of this
size could not be shipped live to the market; they were butchered on the
range, and the meat hauled out in big 'copter-trucks.

Slaughtering was dangerous and exciting work. It was done with medium
tanks mounting fifty-mm guns, usually working at the rear of the herd,
although a supercow herd could change directions almost in a second and
the killing-tanks would then find themselves in front of a stampede. I
saw several such incidents. Once Gail and I had to dive in with our car
and help turn such a stampede.

We got back to the ranch house shortly before dinner. Gail went at once
to change clothes; Colonel Hickock and I sat down together for a drink
in his library, a beautiful room. I especially admired the walls,
panelled in plastic-hardened supercow-leather.

"What do you think of our planet now, Mr. Silk?" Colonel Hickock asked.

"Well, Colonel, your final message to the State was part of the briefing
I received," I replied. "I must say that I agree with your opinions.
Especially with your opinion of local political practices. Politics is
nothing, here, if not exciting and exacting."

"You don't understand it though." That was about half-question and
half-statement. "Particularly our custom of using politicians as clay
pigeons."

"Well, it is rather unusual...."

"Yes." The dryness in his tone was a paragraph of comment on my
understatement. "And it's fundamental to our system of government.

"You were out all afternoon with Gail; you saw how we have to handle the
supercow herds. Well, it is upon the fact that every rancher must have
at his disposal a powerful force of aircraft and armor, easily
convertible to military uses, that our political freedom rests. You see,
our government is, in effect, an oligarchy of the big landowners and
ranchers, who, in combination, have enough military power to overturn
any Planetary government overnight. And, on the local level, it is a
paternalistic feudalism.

"That's something that would have stood the hair of any Twentieth
Century 'Liberal' on end. And it gives us the freest government anywhere
in the galaxy.

"There were a number of occasions, much less frequent now than formerly,
when coalitions of big ranches combined their strength and marched on
the Planetary government to protect their rights from government
encroachment. This sort of thing could only be resorted to in defense of
some inherent right, and never to infringe on the rights of others.
Because, in the latter case, other armed coalitions would have arisen,
as they did once or twice during the first three decades of New Texan
history, to resist.

"So the right of armed intervention by the people when the government
invaded or threatened their rights became an acknowledged part of our
political system.

"And--this arises as a natural consequence--you can't give a man with
five hundred employees and a force of tanks and aircraft the right to
resist the government, then at the same time deny that right to a man
who has only his own pistol or machete."

"I notice the President and the other officials have themselves
surrounded by guards to protect them from individual attack," I said.
"Why doesn't the government, as such, protect itself with an army and
air force large enough to resist any possible coalition of the big
ranchers?"

"_Because we won't let the government get that strong!_" the Colonel
said forcefully. "That's one of the basic premises. We have no standing
army, only the New Texas Rangers. And the legislature won't authorize
any standing army, or appropriate funds to support one. Any member of
the legislature who tried it would get what Austin Maverick got, a
couple of weeks ago, or what Sam Saltkin got, eight years ago, when he
proposed a law for the compulsory registration and licensing of
firearms. The opposition to that tax scheme of Maverick's wasn't because
of what it would cost the public in taxes, but from fear of what the
government could do with the money after they got it.

"Keep a government poor and weak and it's your servant; let it get rich
and powerful and it's your master. We don't want any masters here on
New Texas."

"But the President has a bodyguard," I noted.

"Casualty rate was too high," Hickock explained. "Remember, the
President's job is inherently impossible: he has to represent _all_ the
people."

I thought that over, could see the illogical logic, but ... "How about
your rancher oligarchy?"

He laughed. "Son, if I started acting like a master around this ranch in
the morning, they'd find my body in an irrigation ditch before sunset.

"Sure, if you have a real army, you can keep the men under your
thumb--use one regiment or one division to put down mutiny in another.
But when you have only five hundred men, all of whom know everybody else
and all of them armed, you just act real considerate of them if you want
to keep on living."

"Then would you say that the opposition to annexation comes from the
people who are afraid that if New Texas enters the Solar League, there
will be League troops sent here and this ... this interesting system of
insuring government responsibility to the public would be brought to an
end?"

"Yes. If you can show the people of this planet that the League won't
interfere with local political practices, you'll have a 99.95 percent
majority in favor of annexation. We're too close to the z'Srauff
star-cluster, out here, not to see the benefits of joining the Solar
League."

We left the Hickock ranch on Sunday afternoon and while Hoddy guided our
air-car back to New Austin, I had a little time to revise some of my
ideas about New Texas. That is, I had time to think during those few
moments when Hoddy wasn't taking advantage of our diplomatic immunity to
invent new air-ground traffic laws.

My thoughts alternated between the pleasure of remembering Gail's gay
company and the gloom of understanding the complete implications of the
Colonel's clarifying lectures. Against the background of his remarks, I
could find myself appreciating the Ghopal-Klüng-Natalenko reasoning: the
only way to cut the Gordian knot was to have another Solar League
Ambassador killed.

And, whenever I could escape thinking about the fact that the next
Ambassador to be the clay pigeon was me, I found myself wondering if I
wanted the League to take over. Annexation, yes; New Texas customs would
be protected under a treaty of annexation. But the "justified conquest"
urged by Machiavelli, Jr.? No.

I was still struggling with the problem when we reached the Embassy
about 1700. Everyone was there, including Stonehenge, who had returned
two hours earlier with the good news that the fleet had moved into
position only sixty light-minutes off Capella IV. I had reached the
point in my thinking where I had decided it was useless to keep Hoddy
and Stonehenge apart except as an exercise in mental agility. Inasmuch
as my brain was already weight-lifting, swinging from a flying trapeze
to elusive flying rings while doing triple somersaults and at the same
time juggling seven Indian clubs, I skipped the whole matter.

But I'm fairly certain that it wasn't till then that Hoddy had a chance
to deliver his letter-of-credence to Stonehenge.

After dinner, we gathered in my office for our coffee and a final
conference before the opening of the trial the next morning.

Stonehenge spoke first, looking around the table at everyone except me.

"No matter what happens, we have the fleet within call. Sir Rodney's
been active picking up those z'Srauff meteor-mining boats. They no
longer have a tight screen around the system. We do. I don't think that
anyone, except us, knows that the fleet's where it is."

_No matter what happens_, I thought glumly, and the phrase explained why
he hadn't been able to look at me.

"Well, boss, I gave you my end of it, comin' in," Hoddy said. "Want me
to go over it again? All right. In Bonneyville, we found half a dozen
people who can swear that Kettle-Belly Sam Bonney was making
preparations to protect those three brothers an hour before Ambassador
Cumshaw was shot. The whole town's sorer than hell at Kettle-Belly for
antagonizing the Hickock outfit and getting the place shot up the way it
was. And we have witnesses that Kettle-Belly was in some kind of deal
with the z'Srauff, too. The Rangers gathered up eight of them, who can
swear to the preparations and to the fact that Kettle-Belly had z'Srauff
visitors on different occasions before the shooting."

"That's what we want," Stonehenge said. "Something that'll connect this
murder with the z'Srauff."

"Well, wait till you hear what I've got," Parros told him. "In the first
place, we traced the gun and the air-car. The Bonney brothers bought
them both from z'Srauff merchants, for ridiculously nominal prices. The
merchant who sold the aircar is normally in the dry-goods business, and
the one who sold the auto-rifle runs a toy shop. In their whole lives,
those three boys never had enough money among them to pay the list price
of the gun, let alone the car. That is, not until a week before the
murder."

"They got prosperous, all of a sudden?" I asked.

"Yes. Two weeks before the shooting, Kettle-Belly Sam's bank account got
a sudden transfusion: some anonymous benefactor deposited 250,000
pesos--about a hundred thousand dollars--to his credit. He drew out
75,000 of it and some of the money turned up again in the hands of
Switchblade and Jack-High and Turkey-Buzzard. Then, a week before you
landed here, he got another hundred thousand from the same anonymous
source and he drew out twenty thousand of that. We think that was the
money that went to pay for the attempted knife-job on Hutchinson. Two
days before the barbecue, the waiter deposited a thousand at the New
Austin Packers' and Shippers' Trust."

"Can you get that introduced as evidence at the trial?" I asked.

"Sure. Kettle-Belly banks at a town called Crooked Creek, about forty
miles from Bonneyville. We have witnesses from the bank.

"I also got the dope on the line the Bonney brothers are going to take
at the trial. They have a lawyer, Clement A. Sidney, a member of what
passes for the Socialist Party on this planet. The defense will take the
line of full denial of everything. The Bonneys are just three poor but
honest boys who are being framed by the corrupt tools of the Big
Ranching Interests."

Hoddy made an impolite noise. "Whatta we got to worry about, then?" he
demanded. "They're a cinch for conviction."

"I agree with that," Stonehenge said. "If they tried to base their
defense on political conviction and opposition by the Solar League, they
might have a chance. This way, they haven't."

"All right, gentlemen," I said, "I take it that we're agreed that we
must all follow a single line of policy and not work at cross-purposes
to each other?"

They all agreed to that instantly, but with a questioning note in their
voices.

"Well, then, I trust you all realize that we cannot, under any
circumstances, allow those three brothers to be convicted in this
court," I added.

There was a moment of startled silence, while Hoddy and Stonehenge and
Parros and Thrombley were understanding what they had just heard. Then
Stonehenge cleared his throat and said:

"Mr. Ambassador! I'm sure that you have some excellent reasons for that
remarkable statement, but I must say--"

"It was a really colossal error on somebody's part," I said, "that this
case was allowed to get into the Court of Political Justice. It never
should have. And if we take a part in the prosecution, or allow those
men to be convicted, we will establish a precedent to support the
principle that a foreign Ambassador is, on this planet, defined as a
practicing local politician.

"I will invite you to digest that for a moment."

A moment was all they needed. Thrombley was horrified and dithered
incoherently. Stonehenge frowned and fidgeted with some papers in front
of him. I could see several thoughts gathering behind his eyes,
including, I was sure, a new view of his instructions from Klüng.

Even Hoddy got at least part of it. "Why, that means that anybody can
bump off any diplomat he doesn't like...." he began.

"That is only part of it, Mr. Ringo," Thrombley told him. "It also means
that a diplomat, instead of being regarded as the representative of his
own government, becomes, in effect, a functionary of the government of
New Texas. Why, all sorts of complications could arise...."

"It certainly would impair, shall we say, the principle of
extraterritoriality of Embassies," Stonehenge picked it up. "And it
would practically destroy the principle of diplomatic immunity."

"Migawd!" Hoddy looked around nervously, as though he could already hear
an army of New Texas Rangers, each with a warrant for Hoddy Ringo,
battering at the gates.

"We'll have to do something!" Gomez, the Secretary of the Embassy, said.

"I don't know what," Stonehenge said. "The obvious solution would be, of
course, to bring charges against those Bonney Boys on simple
first-degree murder, which would be tried in an ordinary criminal court.
But it's too late for that now. We wouldn't have time to prevent their
being arraigned in this Political Justice court, and once a defendant is
brought into court, on this planet, he cannot be brought into court
again for the same act. Not the same _crime_, the same _act_."

I had been thinking about this and I was ready. "Look, we must bring
those Bonney brothers to trial. It's the only effective way of
demonstrating to the public the simple fact that Ambassador Cumshaw was
murdered at the instigation of the z'Srauff. We dare not allow them to
be convicted in the Court of Political Justice, for the reasons already
stated. And to maintain the prestige of the Solar League, we dare not
allow them to go unpunished."

"We can have it one way," Parros said, "and maybe we can have it two
ways. But I'm damned if I can see how we can have it all three ways."

I wasn't surprised that he didn't see it; he hadn't had the same urgency
goading him which had forced me to find the answer. It wasn't an answer
that I liked, but I was in the position where I had no choice.

"Well, here's what we have to do, gentlemen," I began, and from the
respectful way they regarded me, from the attention they were giving my
words, I got a sudden thrill of pride. For the first time since my
scrambled arrival, I was really _Ambassador_ Stephen Silk.




CHAPTER VIII


A couple of New Texas Ranger tanks met the Embassy car four blocks from
the Statehouse and convoyed us into the central plaza, where the
barbecue had been held on the Friday afternoon that I had arrived on New
Texas. There was almost as dense a crowd as the last time I had seen the
place; but they were quieter, to the extent that there were no bands,
and no shooting, no cowbells or whistles. The barbecue pits were going
again, however, and hawkers were pushing or propelling their little
wagons about, vending sandwiches. I saw a half a dozen big twenty-foot
teleview screens, apparently wired from the courtroom.

As soon as the Embassy car and its escorting tanks reached the plaza, an
ovation broke out. I was cheered, with the high-pitched _yipeee!_ of New
Texans and adjured and implored not to let them so-and-sos get away with
it.

There was a veritable army of Rangers on guard at the doors of the
courtroom. The only spectators being admitted to the courtroom seemed to
be prominent citizens with enough pull to secure passes.

Inside, some of the spectators' benches had been removed to clear the
front of the room. In the cleared space, there was one bulky shape
under a cloth cover that seemed to be the air-car and another
cloth-covered shape that looked like a fifty-mm dual-purpose gun.
Smaller exhibits, including a twenty-mm auto-rifle, were piled on the
friends-of-the-court table. The prosecution table was already
occupied--Colonel Hickock, who waved a greeting to me, three or four men
who looked like well-to-do ranchers, and a delegation of lawyers.

"Samuel Goodham," Parros, beside me, whispered, indicating a big,
heavy-set man with white hair, dressed in a dark suit of the cut that
had been fashionable on Terra seventy-five years ago. "Best criminal
lawyer on the planet. Hickock must have hired him."

There was quite a swarm at the center table, too. Some of them were
ranchers, a couple in aggressively shabby workclothes, and there were
several members of the Diplomatic Corps. I shook hands with them and
gathered that they, like myself, were worried about the precedent that
might be established by this trial. While I was introducing Hoddy Ringo
as my attaché extraordinary, which was no less than the truth, the
defense party came in.

There were only three lawyers--a little, rodent-faced fellow, whom
Parros pointed out as Clement Sidney, and two assistants. And, guarded
by a Ranger and a couple of court-bailiffs, the three defendants,
Switchblade Joe, Jack-High Abe and Turkey-Buzzard Tom Bonney. There was
probably a year or so age different from one to another, but they
certainly had a common parentage. They all had pale eyes and narrow,
loose-lipped faces. Subnormal and probably psychopathic, I thought.
Jack-High Abe had his left arm in a sling and his left shoulder in a
plaster cast. The buzz of conversation among the spectators altered its
tone subtly and took on a note of hostility as they entered and seated
themselves.

The balcony seemed to be crowded with press representatives. Several
telecast cameras and sound pickups had been rigged to cover the front of
the room from various angles, a feature that had been missing from the
trial I had seen with Gail on Friday.

Then the judges entered from a door behind the bench, which must have
opened from a passageway under the plaza, and the court was called to
order.

The President Judge was the same Nelson who had presided at the Whately
trial and the first thing on the agenda seemed to be the selection of a
new board of associate judges. Parros explained in a whisper that the
board which had served on the previous trial would sit until that could
be done.

A slip of paper was drawn from a box and a name was called. A man
sitting on one of the front rows of spectators' seats got up and came
forward. One of Sidney's assistants rummaged through a card file he had
in front of him and handed a card to the chief of the defense. At once,
Sidney was on his feet.

"Challenged, for cause!" he called out. "This man is known to have
declared, in conversation at the bar of the Silver Peso Saloon, here in
New Austin, that these three boys, my clients, ought all to be hanged
higher than Haman."

"Yes, I said that!" the venireman declared. "I'll repeat it right here:
all three of these murdering skunks ought to be hanged higher than--"

"Your Honor!" Sidney almost screamed. "If, after hearing this man's
brazen declaration of bigoted class hatred against my clients, he is
allowed to sit on that bench--"

Judge Nelson pounded with his gavel. "You don't have to instruct me in
my judicial duties, Counselor," he said. "The venireman has obviously
disqualified himself by giving evidence of prejudice. Next name."

The next man was challenged: he was a retired packing-house operator in
New Austin, and had once expressed the opinion that Bonneyville and
everybody in it ought to be H-bombed off the face of New Texas.

This Sidney seemed to have gotten the name of everybody likely to be
called for court duty and had something on each one of them, because he
went on like that all morning.

"You know what I think," Stonehenge whispered to me, leaning over behind
Parros. "I think he's just stalling to keep the court in session until
the z'Srauff fleet gets here. I wish we could get hold of one of those
wrist watches."

"I can get you one, before evening," Hoddy offered, "if you don't care
what happens to the mutt that's wearin' it."

"Better not," I decided. "Might tip them off to what we suspect. And we
don't really need one: Sir Rodney will have patrols out far enough to
get warning in time."


We took an hour, at noon, for lunch, and then it began again. By 1647,
fifteen minutes before court should be adjourned, Judge Nelson ordered
the bailiff to turn the clock back to 1300. The clock was turned back
again when it reached 1645. By this time, Clement Sidney was probably
the most unpopular man on New Texas.

Finally, Colonel Andrew J. Hickock rose to his feet.

"Your Honor: the present court is not obliged to retire from the bench
until another court has been chosen as they are now sitting as a court
in being. I propose that the trial begin, with the present court on the
bench."

Sidney began yelling protests. Hoddy Ringo pulled his neckerchief around
under his left ear and held the ends above his head. Nanadabadian, the
Ambassador from Beta Cephus IV, drew his biggest knife and began trying
the edge on a sheet of paper.

"Well, Your Honor, I certainly do not wish to act in an obstructionist
manner. The defense agrees to accept the present court," Sidney decided.

"Prosecution agrees to accept the present court," Goodham parroted.

"The present court will continue on the bench, to try the case of the
Friends of Silas Cumshaw, deceased, versus Switchblade Joe Bonney,
Jack-High Abe Bonney, Turkey-Buzzard Tom Bonney, et als." Judge Nelson
rapped with his gavel. "Court is herewith adjourned until 0900
tomorrow."




CHAPTER IX


The trial got started the next morning with a minimum amount of
objections from Sidney. The charges and specifications were duly read,
the three defendants pleaded not guilty, and then Goodham advanced with
a paper in his hand to address the court. Sidney scampered up to take
his position beside him.

"Your Honor, the prosecution wishes, subject to agreement of the
defense, to enter the following stipulations, to wit: First, that the
late Silas Cumshaw was a practicing politician within the meaning of the
law. Second, that he is now dead, and came to his death in the manner
attested to by the coroner of Sam Houston Continent. Third, that he came
to his death at the hands of the defendants here present."

In all my planning, I'd forgotten that. I couldn't let those
stipulations stand without protest, and at the same time, if I protested
the characterization of Cumshaw as a practicing politician, the trial
could easily end right there. So I prayed for a miracle, and Clement
Sidney promptly obliged me.

"Defense won't stipulate anything!" he barked. "My clients, here, are
victims of a monstrous conspiracy, a conspiracy to conceal the true
facts of the death of Silas Cumshaw. They ought never to have been
arrested or brought here, and if the prosecution wants to establish
anything, they can do it by testimony, in the regular and lawful way.
This practice of free-wheeling stipulation is only one of the many
devices by which the courts of this planet are being perverted to serve
the corrupt and unjust ends of a gang of reactionary landowners!"

Judge Nelson's gavel hit the bench with a crack like a rifle shot.

"Mr. Sidney! In justice to your clients, I would hate to force them to
change lawyers in the middle of their trial, but if I hear another
remark like that about the courts of New Texas, that's exactly what will
happen, because you'll be in jail for contempt! Is that clear, Mr.
Sidney?"

I settled back with a deep sigh of relief which got me, I noticed,
curious stares from my fellow Ambassadors. I disregarded the questions
in their glances; I had what I wanted.

They began calling up the witnesses.

First, the doctor who had certified Ambassador Cumshaw's death. He gave
a concise description of the wounds which had killed my predecessor.
Sidney was trying to make something out of the fact that he was
Hickock's family physician, and consuming more time, when I got up.

"Your Honor, I am present here as _amicus curiae_, because of the
obvious interest which the Government of the Solar League has in this
case...."

"Objection!" Sidney yelled.

"Please state it," Nelson invited.

"This is a court of the people of the planet of New Texas. This foreign
emissary of the Solar League, sent here to conspire with New Texan
traitors to the end that New Texans shall be reduced to a supine and
ravished satrapy of the all-devouring empire of the Galaxy--"

Judge Nelson rapped sharply.

"Friends of the court are defined as persons having a proper interest in
the case. As this case arises from the death of the former Ambassador of
the Solar League, I cannot see how the present Ambassador and his staff
can be excluded. Overruled." He nodded to me. "Continue, Mr.
Ambassador."

"As I understand, I have the same rights of cross-examination of
witnesses as counsel for the prosecution and defense; is that correct,
Your Honor?" It was, so I turned to the witness. "I suppose, Doctor,
that you have had quite a bit of experience, in your practice, with
gunshot wounds?"

He chuckled. "Mr. Ambassador, it is gunshot-wound cases which keep the
practice of medicine and surgery alive on this planet. Yes, I definitely
have."

"Now, you say that the deceased was hit by six different projectiles:
right shoulder almost completely severed, right lung and right ribs
blown out of the chest, spleen and kidneys so intermingled as to be
practically one, and left leg severed by complete shattering of the left
pelvis and hip-joint?"

"That's right."

I picked up the 20-mm auto-rifle--it weighed a good sixty pounds--from
the table, and asked him if this weapon could have inflicted such
wounds. He agreed that it both could and had.

"This the usual type of weapon used in your New Texas political
liquidations?" I asked.

"Certainly not. The usual weapons are pistols; sometimes a hunting-rifle
or a shotgun."

I asked the same question when I cross-examined the ballistics witness.

"Is this the usual type of weapon used in your New Texas political
liquidations?"

"No, not at all. That's a very expensive weapon, Mr. Ambassador. Wasn't
even manufactured on this planet; made by the z'Srauff star-cluster. A
weapon like that sells for five, six hundred pesos. It's used for
shooting really big game--supermastodon, and things like that. And, of
course, for combat."

"It seems," I remarked, "that the defense is overlooking an obvious
point there. I doubt if these three defendants ever, in all their lives,
had among them the price of such a weapon."

That, of course, brought Sidney to his feet, sputtering objections to
this attempt to disparage the honest poverty of his clients, which only
helped to call attention to the point.

Then the prosecution called in a witness named David Crockett
Longfellow. I'd met him at the Hickock ranch; he was Hickock's butler.
He limped from an old injury which had retired him from work on the
range. He was sworn in and testified to his name and occupation.

"Do you know these three defendants?" Goodham asked him.

"Yeah. I even marked one of them for future identification," Longfellow
replied.

Sidney was up at once, shouting objections. After he was quieted down,
Goodham remarked that he'd come to that point later, and began a line of
questioning to establish that Longfellow had been on the Hickock ranch
on the day when Silas Cumshaw was killed.

"Now," Goodham said, "will you relate to the court the matters of
interest which came to your personal observation on that day."

Longfellow began his story. "At about 0900, I was dustin' up and
straightenin' things in the library while the Colonel was at his desk.
All of a sudden, he said to me, 'Davy, suppose you call the Solar
Embassy and see if Mr. Cumshaw is doin' anything today; if he isn't, ask
him if he wants to come out.' I was workin' right beside the
telescreen. So I called the Solar League Embassy. Mr. Thrombley took
the call, and I asked him was Mr. Cumshaw around. By this time, the
Colonel got through with what he was doin' at the desk and came over
to the screen. I went back to my work, but I heard the Colonel askin'
Mr. Cumshaw could he come out for the day, an' Mr. Cumshaw sayin',
yes, he could; he'd be out by about 1030.

"Well, 'long about 1030, his air-car came in and landed on the drive.
Little single-seat job that he drove himself. He landed it about a
hundred feet from the outside veranda, like he usually did, and got out.

"Then, this other car came droppin' in from outa nowhere. I didn't pay
it much attention; thought it might be one of the other Ambassadors that
Mr. Cumshaw'd brung along. But Mr. Cumshaw turned around and looked at
it, and then he started to run for the veranda. I was standin' in the
doorway when I seen him startin' to run. I jumped out on the porch,
quick-like, and pulled my gun, and then this auto-rifle begun firin'
outa the other car. There was only eight or ten shots fired from this
car, but most of them hit Mr. Cumshaw."

Goodham waited a few moments. Longfellow's voice had choked and there
was a twitching about his face, as though he were trying to suppress
tears.

"Now, Mr. Longfellow," Goodham said, "did you recognize the people who
were in the car from which the shots came?"

"Yeah. Like I said, I cut a mark on one of them. That one there:
Jack-High Abe Bonney. He was handlin' the gun, and from where I was, he
had his left side to me. I was tryin' for his head, but I always
overshoot, so I have the habit of holdin' low. This time I held too
low." He looked at Jack-High in coldly poisonous hatred. "I'll be sorry
about that as long as I live."

"And who else was in the car?"

"The other two curs outa the same litter: Switchblade an'
Turkey-Buzzard, over there."

Further questioning revealed that Longfellow had had no direct knowledge
of the pursuit, or the siege of the jail in Bonneyville. Colonel Hickock
had taken personal command of that, and had left Longfellow behind to
call the Solar League Embassy and the Rangers. He had made no attempt to
move the body, but had left it lying in the driveway until the doctor
and the Rangers arrived.

Goodham went to the middle table and picked up a heavy automatic pistol.

"I call the court's attention to this pistol. It is an eleven-mm
automatic, manufactured by the Colt Firearms Company of New Texas, a
licensed subsidiary of the Colt Firearms Company of Terra." He handed it
to Longfellow. "Do you know this pistol?" he asked.

Longfellow was almost insulted by the question. Of course he knew his
own pistol. He recited the serial number, and pointed to different scars
and scratches on the weapon, telling how they had been acquired.

"The court accepts that Mr. Longfellow knows his own weapon," Nelson
said. "I assume that this is the weapon with which you claim to have
shot Jack-High Abe Bonney?"

It was, although Longfellow resented the qualification.

"That's all. Your witness, Mr. Sidney," Goodham said.

Sidney began an immediate attack.

Questioning Longfellow's eyesight, intelligence, honesty and integrity,
he tried to show personal enmity toward the Bonneys. He implied that
Longfellow had been conspiring with Cumshaw to bring about the conquest
of New Texas by the Solar League. The verbal exchange became so heated
that both witness and attorney had to be admonished repeatedly from the
bench. But at no point did Sidney shake Longfellow from his one
fundamental statement, that the Bonney brothers had shot Silas Cumshaw
and that he had shot Jack-High Abe Bonney in the shoulder.

When he was finished, I got up and took over.

"Mr. Longfellow, you say that Mr. Thrombley answered the screen at the
Solar League Embassy," I began. "You know Mr. Thrombley?"

"Sure, Mr. Silk. He's been out at the ranch with Mr. Cumshaw a lotta
times."

"Well, beside yourself and Colonel Hickock and Mr. Cumshaw and,
possibly, Mr. Thrombley, who else knew that Mr. Cumshaw would be at the
ranch at 1030 on that morning?"

Nobody. But the aircar had obviously been waiting for Mr. Cumshaw; the
Bonneys must have had advance knowledge. My questions made that point
clear despite the obvious--and reluctantly court-sustained--objections
from Mr. Sidney.

"That will be all, Mr. Longfellow; thank you. Any questions from anybody
else?"

There being none, Longfellow stepped down. It was then a few minutes
before noon, so Judge Nelson recessed court for an hour and a half.


In the afternoon, the surgeon who had treated Jack-High Abe Bonney's
wounded shoulder testified, identifying the bullet which had been
extracted from Bonney's shoulder. A ballistics man from Ranger crime-lab
followed him to the stand and testified that it had been fired from
Longfellow's Colt. Then Ranger Captain Nelson took the stand. His
testimony was about what he had given me at the Embassy, with the
exception that the Bonneys' admission that they had shot Ambassador
Cumshaw was ruled out as having been made under duress.

However, Captain Nelson's testimony didn't need the confessions.

The cover was stripped off the air-car, and a couple of men with a
power-dolly dragged it out in front of the bench. The Ranger Captain
identified it as the car which he had found at the Bonneyville jail. He
went over it with an ultra-violet flashlight and showed where he had
written his name and the date on it with fluorescent ink. The effects of
AA-fire were plainly evident on it.

Then the other shrouded object was unveiled and identified as the gun
which had disabled the air-car. Colonel Hickock identified the gun as
the one with which he had fired on the air-car. Finally, the ballistics
expert was brought back to the stand again, to link the two by means of
fragments found in the car.

Then Goodham brought Kettle-Belly Sam Bonney to the stand.

The Mayor of Bonneyville was a man of fifty or so, short, partially
bald, dressed in faded blue Levis, a frayed white shirt, and a
grease-spotted vest. There was absolutely no mystery about how he had
acquired his nickname. He disgorged a cud of tobacco into a spittoon,
took the oath with unctuous solemnity, then reloaded himself with
another chew and told his version of the attack on the jail.

At about 1045 on the day in question, he testified, he had been in his
office, hard at work in the public service, when an air-car, partially
disabled by gunfire, had landed in the street outside and the three
defendants had rushed in, claiming sanctuary. From then on, the story
flowed along smoothly, following the lines predicted by Captain Nelson
and Parros. Of course he had given the fugitives shelter; they had
claimed to have been near to a political assassination and were in fear
of their lives.

Under Sidney's cross-examination, and coaching, he poured out the story
of Bonneyville's wrongs at the hands of the reactionary landowners, and
the atrocious behavior of the Hickock goon-gang. Finally, after
extracting the last drop of class-hatred venom out of him, Sidney turned
him over to me.

"How many men were inside the jail when the three defendants came
claiming sanctuary?" I asked.

He couldn't rightly say, maybe four or five.

"Closer twenty-five, according to the Rangers. How many of them were
prisoners in the jail?"

"Well, none. The prisoners was all turned out that mornin'. They was
just common drunks, disorderly conduct cases, that kinda thing. We
turned them out so's we could make some repairs."

"You turned them out because you expected to have to defend the jail;
because you knew in advance that these three would be along claiming
sanctuary, and that Colonel Hickock's ranch hands would be right on
their heels, didn't you?" I demanded.

It took a good five minutes before Sidney stopped shouting long enough
for Judge Nelson to sustain the objection.

"You knew these young men all their lives, I take it. What did you know
about their financial circumstances, for instance?"

"Well, they've been ground down an' kept poor by the big ranchers an'
the money-guys...."

"Then weren't you surprised to see them driving such an expensive
aircar?"

"I don't know as it's such an expensive--" he shut his mouth suddenly.

"You know where they got the money to buy that car?" I pressed.

Kettle-Belly Sam didn't answer.

"From the man who paid them to murder Ambassador Silas Cumshaw?" I kept
pressing. "Do you know how much they were paid for that job? Do you know
where the money came from? Do you know who the go-between was, and how
much he got, and how much he kept for himself? Was it the same source
that paid for the recent attempt on President Hutchinson's life?"

"I refuse to answer!" the witness declared, trying to shove his chest
out about half as far as his midriff. "On the grounds that it might
incriminate or degrade me!"

"You can't degrade a Bonney!" a voice from the balcony put in.

"So then," I replied to the voice, "what he means is, incriminate." I
turned to the witness. "That will be all. Excused."

As Bonney left the stand and was led out the side door, Goodham
addressed the bench.

"Now, Your Honor," he said, "I believe that the prosecution has
succeeded in definitely establishing that these three defendants
actually did fire the shot which, on April 22, 2193, deprived Silas
Cumshaw of his life. We will now undertake to prove...."

Followed a long succession of witnesses, each testifying to some public
or private act of philanthropy, some noble trait of character. It was
the sort of thing which the defense lawyer in the Whately case had been
so willing to stipulate. Sidney, of course, tried to make it all out to
be part of a sinister conspiracy to establish a Solar League fifth
column on New Texas. Finally, the prosecution rested its case.

I entertained Gail and her father at the Embassy, that evening. The
street outside was crowded with New Texans, all of them on our side,
shouting slogans like, "Death to the Bonneys!" and "Vengeance for
Cumshaw!" and "Annexation Now!" Some of it was entirely spontaneous,
too. The Hickocks, father and daughter, were given a tremendous ovation,
when they finally left, and followed to their hotel by cheering crowds.
I saw one big banner, lettered: 'DON'T LET NEW TEXAS GO TO THE DOGS.'
and bearing a crude picture of a z'Srauff. I seemed to recall having
seen a couple of our Marines making that banner the evening before in
the Embassy patio, but....




CHAPTER X


The next morning, the third of the trial, opened with the defense
witnesses, character-witnesses for the three killers and witnesses to
the political iniquities of Silas Cumshaw.

Neither Goodham nor I bothered to cross-examine the former. I couldn't
see how any lawyer as shrewd as Sidney had shown himself to be would
even dream of getting such an array of thugs, cutthroats, sluts and
slatterns into court as character witnesses for anybody.

The latter, on the other hand, we went after unmercifully, revealing,
under their enmity for Cumshaw, a small, hard core of bigoted xenophobia
and selfish fear. Goodham did a beautiful job on that; he seemed able,
at a glance, to divine exactly what each witness's motivation was, and
able to make him or her betray that motivation in its least admirable
terms. Finally the defense rested, about a quarter-hour before noon.

I rose and addressed the court:

"Your Honor, while both the prosecution and the defense have done an
admirable job in bringing out the essential facts of how my predecessor
met his death, there are many features about this case which are far
from clear to me. They will be even less clear to my government, which
is composed of men who have never set foot on this planet. For this
reason, I wish to call, or recall, certain witnesses to clarify these
points."

Sidney, who had begun shouting objections as soon as I had gotten to my
feet, finally managed to get himself recognized by the court.

"This Solar League Ambassador, Your Honor, is simply trying to use the
courts of the Planet of New Texas as a sounding-board for his
imperialistic government's propaganda...."

"You may reassure yourself, Mr. Sidney," Judge Nelson said. "This court
will not allow itself to be improperly used, or improperly swayed, by
the Ambassador of the Solar League. This court is interested only in
determining the facts regarding the case before it. You may call your
witnesses, Mr. Ambassador." He glanced at his watch. "Court will now
recess for an hour and a half; can you have them here by 1330?"

I assured him I could after glancing across the room at Ranger Captain
Nelson and catching his nod.


My first witness, that afternoon was Thrombley. After the formalities of
getting his name and connection with the Solar League Embassy on the
record, I asked him, "Mr. Thrombley, did you, on the morning of April
22, receive a call from the Hickock ranch for Mr. Cumshaw?"

"Yes, indeed, Mr. Ambassador. The call was from Mr. Longfellow, Colonel
Hickock's butler. He asked if Mr. Cumshaw were available. It happened
that Mr. Cumshaw was in the same room with me, and he came directly to
the screen. Then Colonel Hickock appeared in the screen, and inquired
if Mr. Cumshaw could come out to the ranch for the day; he said
something about superdove shooting."

"You heard Mr. Cumshaw tell Colonel Hickock that he would be out at the
ranch at about 1030?" Thrombley said he had. "And, to your knowledge,
did anybody else at the Embassy hear that?"

"Oh, no, sir; we were in the Ambassador's private office, and the screen
there is tap-proof."

"And what other calls did you receive, prior to Mr. Cumshaw's death?"

"About fifteen minutes after Mr. Cumshaw had left, the z'Srauff
Ambassador called, about a personal matter. As he was most anxious to
contact Mr. Cumshaw, I told him where he had gone."

"Then, to your knowledge, outside of yourself, Colonel Hickock, and his
butler, the z'Srauff Ambassador was the only person who could have known
that Mr. Cumshaw's car would be landing on Colonel Hickock's drive at or
about 1030. Is that correct?"

"Yes, plus anybody whom the z'Srauff Ambassador might have told."

"Exactly!" I pounced. Then I turned and gave the three Bonney brothers a
sweeping glance. "Plus anybody the z'Srauff Ambassador might have
told.... That's all. Your witness, Mr. Sidney."

Sidney got up, started toward the witness stand, and then thought better
of it.

"No questions," he said.

The next witness was a Mr. James Finnegan; he was identified as cashier
of the Crooked Creek National Bank. I asked him if Kettle-Belly Sam
Bonney did business at his bank; he said yes.

"Anything unusual about Mayor Bonney's account?" I asked.

"Well, it's been unusually active lately. Ordinarily, he carries around
two-three thousand pesos, but about the first of April, that took a big
jump. Quite a big jump; two hundred and fifty thousand pesos, all in a
lump."

"When did Kettle-Belly Sam deposit this large sum?" I asked.

"He didn't. The money came to us in a cashier's check on the Ranchers'
Trust Company of New Austin with an anonymous letter asking that it be
deposited to Mayor Bonney's account. The letter was typed on a sheet of
yellow paper in Basic English."

"Do you have that letter now?" I asked.

"No, I don't. After we'd recorded the new balance, Kettle-Belly came
storming in, raising hell because we'd recorded it. He told me that if
we ever got another deposit like that, we were to turn it over to him in
cash. Then he wanted to see the letter, and when I gave it to him, he
took it over to a telescreen booth, and drew the curtains. I got a
little busy with some other matters, and the next time I looked,
Kettle-Belly was gone and some girl was using the booth."

"That's very interesting, Mr. Finnegan. Was that the last of your
unusual business with Mayor Bonney?"

"Oh, no. Then, about two weeks before Mr. Cumshaw was killed,
Kettle-Belly came in and wanted 50,000 pesos, in a big hurry, in small
bills. I gave it to him, and he grabbed at the money like a starved dog
at a bone, and upset a bottle of red perma-ink, the sort we use to
refill our bank seals. Three of the bills got splashed. I offered to
exchange them, but he said, 'Hell with it; I'm in a hurry,' and went
out. The next day, Switchblade Joe Bonney came in to make payment on a
note we were holding on him. He used those three bills in the payment.

"Then, about a week ago, there was another cashier's check came in for
Kettle-Belly. This time, there was no letter; just one of our regular
deposit-slips. No name of depositor. I held the check, and gave it to
Kettle-Belly. I remember, when it came in, I said to one of the clerks,
'Well, I wonder who's going to get bumped off this time.' And sure
enough ..."

Sidney's yell of, "Objection!" was all his previous objections gathered
into one.

"You say the letter accompanying the first deposit, the one in Basic
English, was apparently taken away by Kettle-Belly Sam Bonney. If you
saw another letter of the same sort, would you be able to say whether or
not it might be like the one you mentioned?"

Sidney vociferating more objections; I was trying to get expert
testimony without previous qualification....

"Not at all, Mr. Sidney," Judge Nelson ruled. "Mr. Silk has merely asked
if Mr. Finnegan could say whether one document bore any resemblance to
another."

I asked permission to have another witness sworn in while Finnegan was
still on the stand, and called in a Mr. Boone, the cashier of the
Packers' and Brokers' Trust Company of New Austin. He had with him a
letter, typed on yellow paper, which he said had accompanied an
anonymous deposit of two hundred thousand pesos. Mr. Finnegan said that
it was exactly like the one he had received, in typing, grammar and
wording, all but the name of the person to whose account the money was
to be deposited.

"And whose account received this anonymous benefaction, Mr. Boone?" I
asked.

"The account," Boone replied, "of Mr. Clement Sidney."

I was surprised that Judge Nelson didn't break the handle of his gavel,
after that. Finally, after a couple of threats to clear the court, order
was restored. Mr. Sidney had no questions to ask this time, either.

The bailiff looked at the next slip of paper I gave him, frowned over
it, and finally asked the court for assistance.

"I can't pronounce this-here thing, at all," he complained.

One of the judges finally got out a mouthful of growls and yaps, and
gave it to the clerk of the court to copy into the record. The next
witness was a z'Srauff, and in the New Texan garb he was wearing, he was
something to open my eyes, even after years on the Hooligan Diplomats.

After he took the stand, the clerk of the court looked at him blankly
for a moment. Then he turned to Judge Nelson.

"Your Honor, how am I gonna go about swearing him in?" he asked. "What
does a z'Srauff swear by, that's binding?"

The President Judge frowned for a moment. "Does anybody here know Basic
well enough to translate the oath?" he asked.

"I think I can," I offered. "I spent a great many years in our Consular
Service, before I was sent here. We use Basic with a great many alien
peoples."

"Administer the oath, then," Nelson told me.

"Put up right hand," I told the z'Srauff. "Do you truly say, in front of
Great One who made all worlds, who has knowledge of what is in the
hearts of all persons, that what you will say here will be true, all
true, and not anything that is not true, and will you so say again at
time when all worlds end? Do you so truly say?"

"Yes. I so truly say."

"Say your name."

"Ppmegll Kkuvtmmecc Cicici."

"What is your business?"

"I put things made of cloth into this world, and I take meat out of this
world."

"Where do you have your house?"

"Here in New Austin, over my house of business, on Coronado Street."

"What people do you see in this place that you have made business with?"

Ppmegll Kkuvtmmecc Cicici pointed a three-fingered hand at the Bonney
brothers.

"What business did you make with them?"

"I gave them for money a machine which goes on the ground and goes in
the air very fast, to take persons and things about."

"Is that the thing you gave them for money?" I asked, pointing at the
exhibit air-car.

"Yes, but it was new then. It has been made broken by things from guns
now."

"What money did they give you for the machine?"

"One hundred pesos."

That started another uproar. There wasn't a soul in that courtroom who
didn't know that five thousand pesos would have been a give-away bargain
price for that car.

"Mr. Ambassador," one of the associate judges interrupted. "I used to be
in the used-car business. Am I expected to believe that this ... this
being ... sold that air-car for a hundred pesos?"

"Here's a notarized copy of the bill of sale, from the office of the
Vehicles Registration Bureau," I said. "I introduce it as evidence."

There was a disturbance at the back of the room, and then the z'Srauff
Ambassador, Gglafrr Ddespttann Vuvuvu, came stalking down the aisle,
followed by a couple of Rangers and two of his attachés. He came forward
and addressed the court.

"May you be happy, sir, but I am in here so quickly not because I have
desire to make noise, but because it is only short time since it got in
my knowledge that one of my persons is in this place. I am here to be of
help to him that he not get in trouble, and to be of help to you. The
name for what I am to do in this place is not part of my knowledge.
Please say it for me."

"You are a friend of the court," Judge Nelson told him. "An _amicus
curiae_."

"You make me happy. Please go on; I have no desire to put stop to what
you do in this place."

"From what person did you get this machine that you gave to these
persons for one hundred pesos?" I asked.

Gglafrr immediately began barking and snarling and yelping at my
witness. The drygoods importer looked startled, and Judge Nelson banged
with his gavel.

"That's enough of that! There'll be nothing spoken in this court but
English, except through an interpreter!"

"Yow! I am sad that what I did was not right," the z'Srauff Ambassador
replied contritely. "But my person here has not as part of his knowledge
that you will make him say what may put him in trouble."

Nelson nodded in agreement.

"You are right: this person who is here has no need to make answer to
any question if it may put him in trouble or make him seem less than he
is."

"I will not make answer," the witness said.

"No further questions."

I turned to Goodham, and then to Sidney; they had no questions, either.
I handed another slip of paper to the bailiff, and another z'Srauff,
named Bbrarkk Jjoknyyegg Kekeke took the stand.

He put into this world things for small persons to make amusement with;
he took out of this world meat and leather. He had his house of business
in New Austin, and he pointed out the three Bonneys as persons in this
place that he saw that he had seen before.

"And what business did you make with them?" I asked.

"I gave them for money a gun which sends out things of
twenty-millimeters very fast, to make death or hurt come to men and
animals and does destruction to machines and things."

"Is this the gun?" I showed it to him.

"It could be. The gun was made in my world; many guns like it are made
there. I am certain that this is the very gun."

I had a notarized copy of a customs house bill in which the gun was
described and specified by serial number. I introduced it as evidence.

"How much money did these three persons give you for this gun?" I asked.

"Five pesos."

"The customs appraisal on this gun is six hundred pesos," I mentioned.

Immediately, Ambassador Vuvuvu was on his feet. "My person here has not
as part of his knowledge that he may put himself in trouble by what he
says to answer these questions."

That put a stop to that. Bbrarkk Jjoknyyegg Kekeke immediately took
refuge in refusal to answer on grounds of self-incrimination.

"That is all, Your Honor," I said, "And now," I continued, when the
witness had left the stand, "I have something further to present to the
court, speaking both as _amicus curiae_ and as Ambassador of the Solar
League. This court cannot convict the three men who are here on trial.
These men should have never been brought to trial in this court: it has
no jurisdiction over this case. This was a simple case of first-degree
murder, by hired assassins, committed against the Ambassador of one
government at the instigation of another, not an act of political
protest within the meaning of New Texan law."

There was a brief silence; both the court and the spectators were
stunned, and most stunned of all were the three Bonney brothers, who had
been watching, fear-sick, while I had been putting a rope around their
necks. The uproar from the rear of the courtroom gave Judge Nelson a
needed minute or so to collect his thoughts. After he had gotten order
restored, he turned to me, grim-faced.

"Ambassador Silk, will you please elaborate on the extraordinary
statement you have just made," he invited, as though every word had
sharp corners that were sticking in his throat.

"Gladly, Your Honor." My words, too, were gouging and scraping my throat
as they came out; I could feel my knees getting absurdly weak, and my
mouth tasted as though I had an old copper penny in it.

"As I understand it, the laws of New Texas do not extend their ordinary
protection to persons engaged in the practice of politics. An act of
personal injury against a politician is considered criminal only to the
extent that the politician injured has not, by his public acts, deserved
the degree of severity with which he has been injured, and the Court of
Political Justice is established for the purpose of determining whether
or not there has been such an excess of severity in the treatment meted
out by the accused to the injured or deceased politician. This gives
rise, of course, to some interesting practices; for instance, what is at
law a trial of the accused is, in substance, a trial of his victim. But
in any case tried in this court, the accused must be a person who has
injured or killed a man who is definable as a practicing politician
under the government of New Texas.

"Speaking for my government, I must deny that these men should have been
tried in this court for the murder of Silas Cumshaw. To do otherwise
would establish the principle and precedent that our Ambassador, or any
other Ambassador here, is a practicing politician under--mark that well,
Your Honor--under the laws and government of New Texas. This would not
only make of any Ambassador a permissable target for any marksman who
happened to disapprove of the policies of another government, but more
serious, it would place the Ambassador and his government in a
subordinate position relative to the government of New Texas. This the
government of the Solar League simply cannot tolerate, for reasons which
it would be insulting to the intelligence of this court to enumerate."

"Mr. Silk," Judge Nelson said gravely. "This court takes full cognizance
of the force of your arguments. However, I'd like to know why you
permitted this trial to run to this length before entering this
objection. Surely you could have made clear the position of your
government at the beginning of this trial."

"Your Honor," I said, "had I done so, these defendants would have been
released, and the facts behind their crime would have never come to
light. I grant that the important function of this court is to determine
questions of relative guilt and innocence. We must not lose sight,
however, of the fact that the primary function of any court is to
determine the truth, and only by the process of the trial of these
depraved murderers-for-hire could the real author of the crime be
uncovered.

"This was important, both for the government of the Solar League and the
government of New Texas. My government now knows who procured the death
of Silas Cumshaw, and we will take appropriate action. The government
of New Texas has now had spelled out, in letters anyone can read, the
fact that this beautiful planet is in truth a _battleground_. Awareness
of this may save New Texas from being the scene of a larger and more
destructive battle. New Texas also knows who are its enemies, and who
can be counted upon to stand as its friends."

"Yes, Mr. Silk. Mr. Vuvuvu, I haven't heard any comment from you.... No
comment? Well, we'll have to close the court, to consider this phase of
the question."

The black screen slid up, for the second time during the trial. There
was silence for a moment, and then the room became a bubbling pot of
sound. At least six fights broke out among the spectators within three
minutes; the Rangers and court bailiffs were busy restoring order.

Gail Hickock, who had been sitting on the front row of the spectators'
seats, came running up while I was still receiving the congratulations
of my fellow diplomats.

"Stephen! How _could_ you?" she demanded. "You know what you've done?
You've gotten those murdering snakes turned loose!"

Andrew Jackson Hickock left the prosecution table and approached.

"Mr. Silk! You've just secured the freedom of three men who murdered one
of my best friends!"

"Colonel Hickock, I believe I knew Silas Cumshaw before you did. He was
one of my instructors at Dumbarton Oaks, and I have always had the
deepest respect and admiration for him. But he taught me one thing,
which you seem to have forgotten since you expatriated yourself--that
in the Diplomatic Service, personal feelings don't count. The only
thing of importance is the advancement of the policies of the Solar
League."

"Silas and I were attachés together, at the old Embassy at Drammool, on
Altair II," Colonel Hickock said. What else he might have said was lost
in the sudden exclamation as the black screen slid down. In front of
Judge Nelson, I saw, there were three pistol-belts, and three pairs of
automatics.

"Switchblade Joe Bonney, Jack-High Abe Bonney, Turkey-Buzzard Tom
Bonney, together with your counsel, approach the court and hear the
verdict," Judge Nelson said.

The three defendants and their lawyer rose. The Bonneys were swaggering
and laughing, but for a lawyer whose clients had just emerged from the
shadow of the gallows, Sidney was looking remarkably unhappy. He
probably had imagination enough to see what would be waiting for him
outside.

"It pains me inexpressibly," Judge Nelson said, "to inform you three
that this court cannot convict you of the cowardly murder of that
learned and honorable old man, Silas Cumshaw, nor can you be brought to
trial in any other court on New Texas again for that dastardly crime.
Here are your weapons, which must be returned to you. Sort them out
yourselves, because I won't dirty my fingers on them. And may you regret
and feel shame for your despicable act as long as you live, which I hope
won't be more than a few hours."

With that, he used the end of his gavel to push the three belts off the
bench and onto the floor at the Bonneys' feet. They stood laughing at
him for a few moments, then stopped, picked the belts up, drew the
pistols to check magazines and chambers, and then began slapping each
others' backs and shouting jubilant congratulations at one another.
Sidney's two assistants and some of his friends came up and began
pumping Sidney's hands.

"There!" Gail flung at me. "Now look at your masterpiece! Why don't you
go up and congratulate him, too?"

And with that, she slapped me across the face. It hurt like the devil;
she was a lot stronger than I'd expected.

"In about two minutes," I told her, "you can apologize to me for that,
or weep over my corpse. Right now, though, you'd better be getting
behind something solid."




CHAPTER XI


I turned and stepped forward to confront the Bonneys, mentally thanking
Gail. Up until she'd slapped me, I'd been weak-kneed and dry-mouthed
with what I had to do. Now I was just plain angry, and I found that I
was thinking a lot more clearly. Jack-High Bonney's wounded left
shoulder, I knew, wouldn't keep him from using his gun hand, but his
shoulder muscles would be stiff enough to slow his draw. I'd intended
saving him until I'd dealt with his brothers. Now, I remembered how he'd
gotten that wound in the first place: he'd been the one who'd used the
auto-rifle, out at the Hickock ranch. So I changed my plans and moved
him up to top priority.

"Hold it!" I yelled at them. "You've been cleared of killing a
politician, but you still have killing a Solar League Ambassador to
answer for. Now get your hands full of guns, if you don't want to die
with them empty!"

The crowd of sympathizers and felicitators simply exploded away from the
Bonney brothers. Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Sidney and a fat,
blowsy woman with brass-colored hair as they both tried to dive under
the friends-of-the-court table at the same place. The Bonney brothers
simply stood and stared at me, for an instant, unbelievingly, as I got
my thumbs on the release-studs of my belt. Judge Nelson's gavel was
hammering, and he was shouting:

"Court-of-Political-Justice-Confederate-Continent-of-New-Texas-is-herewith-
adjourned-reconvene-0900-tomorrow. _Hit the floor!_"

"Damn! He means it!" Switchblade Joe Bonney exclaimed.

Then they all reached for their guns. They were still reaching when I
pressed the studs and the Krupp-Tattas popped up into my hands, and I
swung up my right-hand gun and shot Jack-High through the head. After
that, I just let my subconscious take over. I saw gun flames jump out at
me from the Bonneys' weapons, and I felt my own pistols leap and writhe
in my hands, but I don't believe I was aware of hearing the shots, not
even from my own weapons. The whole thing probably lasted five seconds,
but it seemed like twenty minutes to me. Then there was nobody shooting
at me, and nobody for me to shoot at; the big room was silent, and I was
aware that Judge Nelson and his eight associates were rising cautiously
from behind the bench.

I holstered my left-hand gun, removed and replaced the magazine of the
right-hand gun, then holstered it and reloaded the other one. Hoddy
Ringo and Francisco Parros and Commander Stonehenge were on their feet,
their pistols drawn, covering the spectators' seats. Colonel Hickock had
also drawn a pistol and he was covering Sidney with it, occasionally
moving the muzzle to the left to include the z'Srauff Ambassador and his
two attachés.

By this time, Nelson and the other eight judges were in their seats,
trying to look calm and judicial.

"Your Honor," I said, "I fully realize that no judge likes to have his
court turned into a shooting gallery. I can assure you, however, that my
action here was not the result of any lack of respect for this court. It
was pure necessity. Your Honor can see that: my government could not
permit this crime against its Ambassador to pass unpunished."

Judge Nelson nodded solemnly. "Court was adjourned when this little
incident happened, Mr. Silk," he said.

He leaned forward and looked to where the three Bonney brothers were
making a mess of blood on the floor. "I trust that nobody will construe
my unofficial and personal comments here as establishing any legal
precedent, and I wouldn't like to see this sort of thing become
customary ... but ... you did that all by yourself, with those little
beanshooters?... Not bad, not bad at all, Mr. Silk."

I thanked him, then turned to the z'Srauff Ambassador. I didn't bother
putting my remarks into Basic. He understood, as well as I did, what I
was saying.

"Look, Fido," I told him, "my government is quite well aware of the
source from which the orders for the murder of my predecessor came.
These men I just killed were only the tools.

"We're going to get the brains behind them, if we have to send every
warship we own into the z'Srauff star-cluster and devastate every planet
in it. We don't let dogs snap at us. And when they do, we don't kick
them, we shoot them!"

That, of course, was not exactly striped-pants diplomatic language. I
wondered, for a moment, what Norman Gazarian, the protocol man, would
think if he heard an Ambassador calling another Ambassador Fido.

But it seemed to be the kind of language that Mr. Vuvuvu understood. He
skinned back his upper lip at me and began snarling and growling. Then
he turned on his hind paws and padded angrily down the aisle away from
the front of the courtroom.

The spectators around him and above him began barking, baying, yelping
at him: "Tie a can to his tail!" "Git for home, Bruno!"

Then somebody yelled, "Hey, look! Even his wrist watch is blushing!"

That was perfectly true. Mr. Gglafrr Ddespttann Vuvuvu's watch-face,
normally white, was now glowing a bright ruby-red.

I looked at Stonehenge and found him looking at me. It would be full
dark in four or five hours; there ought to be something spectacular to
see in the cloudless skies of Capella IV tonight.

Fleet Admiral Sir Rodney Tregaskis would see to that.


_FROM REPORT
OF SPACE-COMMANDER STONEHENGE
TO SECRETARY OF AGGRESSION, KLÜNG:

... so the measures considered by yourself
and Secretary of State Ghopal Singh and Security
Coördinator Natalenko, as transmitted to me by
Mr. Hoddy Ringo, were not, I am glad to say,
needed. Ambassador Silk, alive, handled the
thing much better than Ambassador Silk, dead,
could possibly have.

... to confirm Sir Rodney Tregaskis' report from the tales of the few
survivors, the z'Srauff attack came as the Ambassador had expected. They
dropped out of hyperspace about seventy light-minutes outside the
Capella system, apparently in complete ignorance of the presence of our
fleet.

... have learned the entire fleet consisted of about three hundred
spaceships and reports reaching here indicate that no more than twenty
got back to z'Srauff Cluster.

... naturally, the whole affair has had a profound influence, an
influence to the benefit of the Solar League, on all shades of public
opinion.

... as you properly assumed, Mr. Hoddy Ringo is no longer with us. When
it became apparent that the Palme-Silk Annexation Treaty would be
ratified here, Mr. Ringo immediately saw that his status of diplomatic
immunity would automatically terminate. Accordingly, he left this
system, embarking from New Austin for Alderbaran IX, mentioning, as he
shook hands with me, something about a widow. By a curious coincidence,
the richest branch bank in the city was held up by a lone bandit about
half an hour before he boarded the space-ship...._


_FINAL MESSAGE
OF THE LAST SOLAR AMBASSADOR TO NEW
TEXAS
STEPHEN SILK

Copies of the Treaty of Annexation, duly ratified by the New Texas
Legislature, herewith.

Please note that the guarantees of non-intervention in local political
institutions are the very minimum which are acceptable to the people of
New Texas. They are especially adamant that there will be no change in
their peculiar methods of insuring that their elected and appointed
public officials shall be responsible to the electorate.

                       DEPARTMENT ADDENDUM

_After the ratification of the Palme-Silk treaty, Mr. Silk remained on
New Texas, married the daughter of a local rancher there (see file on
First Ambassador, Colonel Andrew Jackson Hickock) and is still active in
politics on that planet, often in opposition to Solar League policies,
which he seems to anticipate with an almost uncanny prescience._


Natalenko re-read the addendum, pursed his thick lips and sighed. There
were so many ways he could be using Mr. Stephen Silk....

For example--he looked at the tri-di star-map, both usefully and
beautifully decorating his walls--over there, where Hoddy Ringo had
gone, near Alderbaran IX.

Those were twin planets, one apparently settled by the equivalent
descendants of the Edwards and the other inhabited by the children of a
Jukes-Kallikak union. Even the Solar League Ambassadors there had taken
the viewpoints of the planets to whom they were accredited, instead of
the all-embracing view which their training should have given them....

Curious problem ... and, how would Stephen Silk have handled it?

The Security Coördinator scrawled a note comprehensible only to
himself....





Brilliant New Novel from Award-Winning Author of Alien Embassy!

In MIRACLE VISITORS, Ian Watson has created a fascinating novel that
explores the UFO phenomenon, a novel that will endlessly intrigue and
envelop the reader. $1.95

[Illustration: Book Cover]

Available wherever books are sold, or order by mail from Book Mailing
Service, Box 690, Rockville Centre, N.Y. 11571. Please add 50¢ postage
and handling. 109


ACE SCIENCE FICTION 360 PARK AVENUE SOUTH · NEW YORK, N.Y. 10010





Zero Population Growth Achieved!

But at what cost? The world now exists with a mandatory abortion law and
sexual freedom reigns. Is this truly a world where ... LOVE CONQUERS ALL

$1.95

[Illustration: Book Cover]

Available wherever books are sold, or order by mail from Book Mailing
Service, Box 690, Rockville Centre, N.Y. 11571. Please add 50¢ postage
and handling. 110


ACE SCIENCE FICTION 360 PARK AVENUE SOUTH ·NEW YORK, N.Y. 10010





Four-Day Planet

Fenris isn't a hell planet, but it's nobody's bargain. With 2,000-hour
days and an 8,000-hour year, it alternates blazing heat with killing
cold. A planet like that tends to breed a special kind of person: tough
enough to stay alive and smart enough to make the best of it. When that
kind of person discovers he's being cheated of wealth he's risked his
life for, that kind of planet is ripe for revolution.


Lone Star Planet

New Texas: its citizens figure that name about says it all. The Solar
League ambassador to the Lone Star Planet has the unenviable task of
convincing New Texans that a s'Srauff attack is imminent, and dangerous.
Unfortunately it's common knowledge that the s'Srauff are evolved from
canine ancestors--and not a Texan alive is about to be scared of a
talking dog! But unless he can get them to act, and fast, there won't be
a Texan alive, scared or otherwise!

_BOOKEND_


At the crest of the ridge, Benson stopped for an instant, glancing first
at his wrist-watch and then back over his shoulder. It was 0539; the
barrage was due in eleven minutes, at the spot where he was now
standing. Behind, on the long northeast slope, he could see the columns
of black oil smoke rising from what had been the Pan-Soviet advance
supply dump. There was a great deal of firing going on, back there; he
wondered if the Commies had managed to corner a few of his men, after
the patrol had accomplished its mission and scattered, or if a couple of
Communist units were shooting each other up in mutual mistaken identity.
The result would be about the same in either case--reserve units would
be disorganized, and some men would have been pulled back from the front
line. His dozen-odd UN regulars and Turkish partisans had done their
best to simulate a paratroop attack in force. At least, his job was
done; now to execute that classic infantry maneuver described as, "Let's
get the hell outa here." This was his last patrol before rotation home.
He didn't want anything unfortunate to happen.

There was a little ravine to the left; the stream which had cut it in
the steep southern slope of the ridge would be dry at this time of year,
and he could make better time, and find protection in it from any chance
shots when the interdictory barrage started. He hurried toward it and
followed it down to the valley that would lead toward the front--the
thinly-held section of the Communist lines, and the UN lines beyond,
where fresh troops were waiting to jump from their holes and begin the
attack.

There was something wrong about this ravine, though. At first, it was
only a vague presentiment, growing stronger as he followed the dry gully
down to the valley below. Something he had smelled, or heard, or seen,
without conscious recognition. Then, in the dry sand where the ravine
debouched into the valley, he saw faint tank-tracks--only one pair.
There was something wrong about the vines that mantled one side of the
ravine, too....

An instant later, he was diving to the right, breaking his fall with the
butt of his auto-carbine, rolling rapidly toward the cover of a rock,
and as he did so, the thinking part of his mind recognized what was
wrong. The tank-tracks had ended against the vine-grown side of the
ravine, what he had smelled had been lubricating oil and petrol, and the
leaves on some of the vines hung upside down.

Almost at once, from behind the vines, a tank's machine guns snarled at
him, clipping the place where he had been standing, then shifting to
rage against the sheltering rock. With a sudden motor-roar, the muzzle
of a long tank-gun pushed out through the vines, and then the low body
of a tank with a red star on the turret came rumbling out of the
camouflaged bay. The machine guns kept him pinned behind the rock; the
tank swerved ever so slightly so that its wide left tread was aimed
directly at him, then picked up speed. Aren't even going to waste a
shell on me, he thought.

Futilely, he let go a clip from his carbine, trying to hit one of the
vision-slits; then rolled to one side, dropped out the clip, slapped in
another. There was a shimmering blue mist around him. If he only hadn't
used his last grenade, back there at the supply-dump....

The strange blue mist became a flickering radiance that ran through
all the colors of the spectrum and became an utter, impenetrable
blackness....

       *       *       *       *       *

There were voices in the blackness, and a softness under him, but under
his back, when he had been lying on his stomach, as though he were now
on a comfortable bed. They got me alive, he thought; now comes the
brainwashing!

He cracked one eye open imperceptibly. Lights, white and glaring, from a
ceiling far above; walls as white as the lights. Without moving his
head, he opened both eyes and shifted them from right to left. Vaguely,
he could see people and, behind them, machines so simply designed that
their functions were unguessable. He sat up and looked around groggily.
The people, their costumes--definitely not Pan-Soviet uniforms--and the
room and its machines, told him nothing. The hardness under his right
hip was a welcome surprise; they hadn't taken his pistol from him!
Feigning even more puzzlement and weakness, he clutched his knees with
his elbows and leaned his head forward on them, trying to collect his
thoughts.

"We shall have to give up, Gregory," a voice trembled with
disappointment.

"Why, Anthony?" The new voice was deeper, more aggressive.

"Look. Another typical reaction; retreat to the foetus."

Footsteps approached. Another voice, discouragement heavily weighting
each syllable: "You're right. He's like all the others. We'll have to
send him back."

"And look for no more?" The voice he recognized as Anthony faltered
between question and statement.

A babel of voices, in dispute; then, clearly, the voice Benson had come
to label as Gregory, cut in:

"I will never give up!"

He raised his head; there was something in the timbre of that voice
reminding him of his own feelings in the dark days when the UN had
everywhere been reeling back under the Pan-Soviet hammer-blows.

"Anthony!" Gregory's voice again; Benson saw the speaker; short, stocky,
gray-haired, stubborn lines about the mouth. The face of a man chasing
an illusive but not uncapturable dream.

"That means nothing." A tall thin man, too lean for the tunic-like
garment he wore, was shaking his head.

Deliberately, trying to remember his college courses in psychology, he
forced himself to accept, and to assess, what he saw as reality. He was
on a small table, like an operating table; the whole place looked like a
medical lab or a clinic. He was still in uniform; his boots had soiled
the white sheets with the dust of Armenia. He had all his equipment,
including his pistol and combat-knife; his carbine was gone, however. He
could feel the weight of his helmet on his head. The room still rocked
and swayed a little, but the faces of the people were coming into focus.

       *       *       *       *       *

He counted them, saying each number to himself: one, two, three, four,
five men; one woman. He swung his feet over the edge of the table, being
careful that it would be between him and the others when he rose, and
began inching his right hand toward his right hip, using his left hand,
on his brow, to misdirect attention.

"I would classify his actions as arising from conscious effort at
cortico-thalamic integration," the woman said, like an archaeologist who
has just found a K-ration tin at the bottom of a neolithic
kitchen-midden. She had the peculiarly young-old look of the spinster
teachers with whom Benson had worked before going to the war.

"I want to believe it, but I'm afraid to," another man for whom Benson
had no name-association said. He was portly, gray-haired,
arrogant-faced; he wore a short black jacket with a jewelled
zipper-pull, and striped trousers.

Benson cleared his throat. "Just who are you people?" he inquired. "And
just where am I?"

Anthony grabbed Gregory's hand and pumped it frantically.

"I've dreamed of the day when I could say this!" he cried.
"Congratulations, Gregory!"

       *       *       *       *       *

That touched off another bedlam, of joy, this time, instead of despair.
Benson hid his amusement at the facility with which all of them were
discovering in one another the courage, vision and stamina of true
patriots and pioneers. He let it go on for a few moments, hoping to
glean some clue. Finally, he interrupted.

"I believe I asked a couple of questions," he said, using the voice he
reserved for sergeants and second lieutenants. "I hate to break up this
mutual admiration session, but I would appreciate some answers. This
isn't anything like the situation I last remember...."

"He remembers!" Gregory exclaimed. "That confirms your first derivation
by symbolic logic, and it strengthens the validity of the second...."

The schoolteacherish woman began jabbering excitedly; she ran through
about a paragraph of what was pure gobbledegook to Benson, before the
man with the arrogant face and the jewelled zipper-pull broke in on her.

"Save that for later, Paula," he barked. "I'd be very much interested in
your theories about why memories are unimpaired when you time-jump
forward and lost when you reverse the process, but let's stick to
business. We have what we wanted; now let's use what we have."

"I never liked the way you made your money," a dark-faced, cadaverous
man said, "but when you talk, it makes sense. Let's get on with it."

Benson used the brief silence which followed to study the six. With the
exception of the two who had just spoken, there was the indefinable mark
of the fanatic upon all of them--people fanatical about different
things, united for different reasons in a single purpose. It reminded
him sharply of some teachers' committee about to beard a school-board
with an unpopular and expensive recommendation.

Anthony--the oldest of the lot, in a knee-length tunic--turned to
Gregory.

"I believe you had better...." he began.

"As to who we are, we'll explain that, partially, later. As for your
question, 'Where am I?' that will have to be rephrased. If you ask,
'When and where am I?' I can furnish a rational answer. In the temporal
dimension, you are fifty years futureward of the day of your death;
spatially, you are about eight thousand miles from the place of your
death, in what is now the World Capitol, St. Louis."

Nothing in the answer made sense but the name of the city. Benson
chuckled.

"What happened; the Cardinals conquer the world? I knew they had a good
team, but I didn't think it was that good."

"No, no," Gregory told him earnestly. "The government isn't a theocracy.
At least not yet. But if The Guide keeps on insisting that only
beautiful things are good and that he is uniquely qualified to define
beauty, watch his rule change into just that."

"I've been detecting symptoms of religious paranoia, messianic
delusions, about his public statements...." the woman began.

"Idolatry!" another member of the group, who wore a black coat fastened
to the neck, and white neck-bands, rasped. "Idolatry in deed, as well as
in spirit!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The sense of unreality, partially dispelled, began to return. Benson
dropped to the floor and stood beside the table, getting a cigarette out
of his pocket and lighting it.

"I made a joke," he said, putting his lighter away. "The fact that none
of you got it has done more to prove that I am fifty years in the future
than anything any of you could say." He went on to explain who the St.
Louis Cardinals were.

"Yes; I remember! Baseball!" Anthony exclaimed. "There is no baseball,
now. The Guide will not allow competitive sports; he says that they
foster the spirit of violence...."

The cadaverous man in the blue jacket turned to the man in the black
garment of similar cut.

"You probably know more history than any of us," he said, getting a
cigar out of his pocket and lighting it. He lighted it by rubbing the
end on the sole of his shoe. "Suppose you tell him what the score is."
He turned to Benson. "You can rely on his dates and happenings; his
interpretation's strictly capitalist, of course," he said.

Black-jacket shook his head. "You first, Gregory," he said. "Tell him
how he got here, and then I'll tell him why."

"I believe," Gregory began, "that in your period, fiction writers made
some use of the subject of time-travel. It was not, however, given
serious consideration, largely because of certain alleged paradoxes
involved, and because of an elementalistic and objectifying attitude
toward the whole subject of time. I won't go into the mathematics and
symbolic logic involved, but we have disposed of the objections; more,
we have succeeded in constructing a time-machine, if you want to call it
that. We prefer to call it a temporal-spatial displacement field
generator."

"It's really very simple," the woman called Paula interrupted. "If the
universe is expanding, time is a widening spiral; if contracting, a
diminishing spiral; if static, a uniform spiral. The possibility of
pulsation was our only worry...."

"That's no worry," Gregory reproved her. "I showed you that the rate was
too slow to have an effect on...."

"Oh, nonsense; you can measure something which exists within a
microsecond, but where is the instrument to measure a temporal pulsation
that may require years...? You haven't come to that yet."

"Be quiet, both of you!" the man with the black coat and the white bands
commanded. "While you argue about vanities, thousands are being
converted to the godlessness of The Guide, and other thousands of his
dupes are dying, unprepared to face their Maker!"

"All right, you invented a time-machine," Benson said. "In civvies, I
was only a high school chemistry teacher. I can tell a class of juniors
the difference between H_{2}O and H_{2}SO_{4}, but the theory of
time-travel is wasted on me.... Suppose you just let me ask the
questions; then I'll be sure of finding out what I don't know. For
instance, who won the war I was fighting in, before you grabbed me and
brought me here? The Commies?"

"No, the United Nations," Anthony told him. "At least, they were the
least exhausted when both sides decided to quit."

"Then what's this dictatorship.... The Guide? Extreme Rightist?"

"Walter, you'd better tell him," Gregory said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We damn near lost the war," the man in the black jacket and striped
trousers said, "but for once, we won the peace. The Soviet Bloc was
broken up--India, China, Indonesia, Mongolia, Russia, the Ukraine, all
the Satellite States. Most of them turned into little dictatorships,
like the Latin American countries after the liberation from Spain, but
they were personal, non-ideological, generally benevolent,
dictatorships, the kind that can grow into democracies, if they're given
time."

"Capitalistic dictatorships, he means," the cadaverous man in the blue
jacket explained.

"Be quiet, Carl," Anthony told him. "Let's not confuse this with any
class-struggle stuff."

"Actually, the United Nations rules the world," Walter continued. "What
goes on in the Ukraine or Latvia or Manchuria is about analogous to what
went on under the old United States government in, let's say,
Tammany-ruled New York. But here's the catch. The UN is ruled absolutely
by one man."

"How could that happen? In my time, the UN had its functions so
subdivided and compartmented that it couldn't even run a war properly.
Our army commanders were making war by systematic disobedience."

"The charter was changed shortly after ... er, that is, after...."
Walter was fumbling for words.

"After my death." Benson finished politely. "Go on. Even with a changed
charter, how did one man get all the powers into his hands?"

"By sorcery!" black-coat-and-white-bands fairly shouted. "By the help of
his master, Satan!"

"You know, there are times when some such theory tempts me," Paula said.

"He was a big moneybags," Carl said. "He bribed his way in. See, New
York was bombed flat. Where the old UN buildings were, it's still hot.
So The Guide donated a big tract of land outside St. Louis, built these
buildings--we're in the basement of one of them, right now, if you want
a good laugh--and before long, he had the whole organization eating out
of his hand. They just voted him into power, and the world into
slavery."

Benson looked around at the others, who were nodding in varying degrees
of agreement.

"Substantially, that's it. He managed to convince everybody of his
altruism, integrity and wisdom," Walter said. "It was almost
blasphemous to say anything against him. I really don't understand how
it happened...."

"Well, what's he been doing with his power?" Benson asked. "Wise things,
or stupid ones?"

"I could be general, and say that he has deprived all of us of our
political and other liberties. It is best to be specific," Anthony said.
"Gregory?"

"My own field--dimensional physics--hasn't been interfered with much,
yet. It's different in other fields. For instance, all research in
sonics has been arbitrarily stopped. So has a great deal of work in
organic and synthetic chemistry. Psychology is a madhouse of ... what
was the old word, licentiousness? No, lysenkoism. Medicine and
surgery--well, there's a huge program of compulsory sterilization, and
another one of eugenic marriage-control. And infants who don't conform
to certain physical standards don't survive. Neither do people who have
disfiguring accidents beyond the power of plastic surgery."

       *       *       *       *       *

Paula spoke next. "My field is child welfare. Well, I'm going to show
you an audio-visual of an interesting ceremony in a Hindu village,
derived from the ancient custom of the suttee. It is the Hindu method of
conforming to The Guide's demand that only beautiful children be allowed
to grow to maturity."

The film was mercifully brief. Even in spite of the drums and gongs, and
the chanting of the crowd, Benson found out how loudly a newborn infant
can scream in a fire. The others looked as though they were going to be
sick; he doubted if he looked much better.

"Of course, we are a more practical and mechanical-minded people, here
and in Europe," Paula added, holding down her gorge by main strength.
"We have lethal-gas chambers that even Hitler would have envied."

"I am a musician," Anthony said. "A composer. If Gregory thinks that the
sciences are controlled, he should try to write even the simplest piece
of music. The extent of censorship and control over all the arts, and
especially music, is incredible." He coughed slightly. "And I have
another motive, a more selfish one. I am approaching the compulsory
retirement age; I will soon be invited to go to one of the Havens. Even
though these Havens are located in the most barren places, they are
beauty-spots, verdant beyond belief. It is of only passing interest
that, while large numbers of the aged go there yearly, their populations
remain constant, and, to judge from the quantities of supplies shipped
to them, extremely small."

       *       *       *       *       *

"They call me Samuel, in this organization," the man in the long black
coat said. "Whoever gave me that alias must have chosen it because I am
here in an effort to live up to it. Although I am ordained by no church,
I fight for all of them. The plain fact is that this man we call The
Guide is really the Antichrist!"

"Well, I haven't quite so lofty a motive, but it's good enough to make
me willing to finance this project," Walter said. "It's very simple. The
Guide won't let people make money, and if they do, he taxes it away from
them. And he has laws to prohibit inheritance; what little you can
accumulate, you can't pass on to your children."

"I put up a lot of the money, too, don't forget," Carl told him. "Or the
Union did; I'm a poor man, myself." He was smoking an excellent cigar,
for a poor man, and his clothes could have come from the same tailor as
Walter's. "Look, we got a real Union--the Union of all unions. Every
working man in North America, Europe, Australia and South Africa belongs
to it. And The Guide has us all hog-tied."

"He won't let you strike," Benson chuckled.

"That's right. And what can we do? Why, we can't even make our
closed-shop contracts stick. And as far as getting anything like a
pay-raise...."

"Good thing. Another pay-raise in some of my companies would bankrupt
them, the way The Guide has us under his thumb...." Walter began, but he
was cut off.

"Well! It seems as though this Guide has done some good, if he's made
you two realize that you're both on the same side, and that what hurts
one hurts both," Benson said. "When I shipped out for Turkey in '77,
neither Labor nor Management had learned that." He looked from one to
another of them. "The Guide must have a really good bodyguard, with all
the enemies he's made."

Gregory shook his head. "He lives virtually alone, in a very small house
on the UN Capitol grounds. In fact, except for a small police-force,
armed only with non-lethal stun-guns, your profession of arms is
non-existent."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I've been guessing what you want me to do," Benson said. "You want this
Guide bumped off. But why can't any of you do it? Or, if it's too risky,
at least somebody from your own time? Why me?"

"We can't. Everybody in the world today is conditioned against violence,
especially the taking of human life," Anthony told him.

"Now, wait a moment!" This time, he was using the voice he would have
employed in chiding a couple of Anatolian peasant partisans who were
field-stripping a machine gun the wrong way. "Those babies in that film
you showed me weren't dying of old age...."

"That is not violence," Paula said bitterly. "That is humane
beneficence. Ugly people would be unhappy, and would make others
unhappy, in a world where everybody else is beautiful."

"And all these oppressive and tyrannical laws," Benson continued. "How
does he enforce them, without violence, actual or threatened?"

Samuel started to say something about the Power of the Evil One; Paula,
ignoring him, said:

"I really don't know; he just does it. Mass hypnotism of some sort. I
know music has something to do with it, because there is always music,
everywhere. This laboratory, for instance, was secretly soundproofed; we
couldn't have worked here, otherwise."

"All right. I can see that you'd need somebody from the past, preferably
a soldier, whose conditioning has been in favor rather than against
violence. I'm not the only one you snatched, I take it?"

"No. We've been using that machine to pick up men from battlefields all
over the world and all over history," Gregory said. "Until now, none of
them could adjust.... Uggh!" He shuddered, looking even sicker than when
the film was being shown.

"He's thinking," Walter said, "about a French officer from Waterloo who
blew out his brains with a pocket-pistol on that table, and an English
archer from Agincourt who ran amok with a dagger in here, and a trooper
of the Seventh Cavalry from the Custer Massacre."

Gregory managed to overcome his revulsion. "You see, we were forced to
take our subjects largely at random with regard to individual
characteristics, mental attitudes, adaptability, et cetera." As long as
he stuck to high order abstractions, he could control himself. "Aside
from their professional lack of repugnance for violence, we took
soldiers from battlefields because we could select men facing immediate
death, whose removal from the past would not have any effect upon the
casual chain of events affecting the present."

A warning buzzer rasped in Benson's brain. He nodded, poker-faced.

"I can see that," he agreed. "You wouldn't dare do anything to change
the past. That was always one of the favorite paradoxes in time-travel
fiction.... Well, I think I have the general picture. You have a
dictator who is tyrannizing you; you want to get rid of him; you can't
kill him yourselves. I'm opposed to dictators, myself; that--and the
Selective Service law, of course--was why I was a soldier. I have no
moral or psychological taboos against killing dictators, or anybody
else. Suppose I cooperate with you; what's in it for me?"

There was a long silence. Walter and Carl looked at one another
inquiringly; the others dithered helplessly. It was Carl who answered.

"Your return to your own time and place."

"And if I don't cooperate with you?"

"Guess when and where else we could send you," Walter said.

Benson dropped his cigarette and tramped it.

"Exactly the same time and place?" he asked.

"Well, the structure of space-time demands...." Paula began.

"The spatio-temporal displacement field is capable of identifying that
spot--" Gregory pointed to a ten-foot circle in front of a bank of
sleek-cabineted, dial-studded machines "--with any set of space-time
coordinates in the universe. However, to avoid disruption of the
structure of space-time, we must return you to approximately the same
point in space-time."

Benson nodded again, this time at the confirmation of his earlier
suspicion. Well, while he was alive, he still had a chance.

"All right; tell me exactly what you want me to do."

       *       *       *       *       *

A third outbreak of bedlam, this time of relief and frantic explanation.

"Shut up, all of you!" For so thin a man, Carl had an astonishing voice.
"I worked this out, so let me tell it." He turned to Benson. "Maybe I'm
tougher than the rest of them, or maybe I'm not as deeply conditioned.
For one thing, I'm tone-deaf. Well, here's the way it is. Gregory can
set the machine to function automatically. You stand where he shows you,
press the button he shows you, and fifteen seconds later it'll take you
forward in time five seconds and about a kilometer in space, to The
Guide's office. He'll be at his desk now. You'll have forty-five seconds
to do the job, from the time the field collapses around you till it
rebuilds. Then you'll be taken back to your own time again. The whole
thing's automatic."

"Can do," Benson agreed. "How do I kill him?"

"I'm getting sick!" Paula murmured weakly. Her face was whiter than her
gown.

"Take care of her, Samuel. Both of you'd better get out of here,"
Gregory said.

"The Lord of Hosts is my strength, He will.... Uggggh!" Samuel gasped.

"Conditioning's getting him, too; we gotta be quick," Carl said. "Here.
This is what you'll use." He handed Benson a two-inch globe of black
plastic. "Take the damn thing, quick! Little button on the side; press
it, and get it out of your hand fast...." He retched. "Limited-effect
bomb; everything within two-meter circle burned to nothing; outside
that, great but not unendurable heat. Shut your eyes when you throw it.
Flash almost blinding." He dropped his cigar and turned almost green in
the face. Walter had a drink poured and handed it to him. "Uggh! Thanks,
Walter." He downed it.

"Peculiar sort of thing for a non-violent people to manufacture," Benson
said, looking at the bomb and then putting it in his jacket pocket.

"It isn't a weapon. Industrial; we use it in mining. I used plenty of
them, in Walter's iron mines."

He nodded again. "Where do I stand, now?" he asked.

"Right over here." Gregory placed him in front of a small panel with
three buttons. "Press the middle one, and step back into the small red
circle and stand perfectly still while the field builds up and
collapses. Face that way."

       *       *       *       *       *

Benson drew his pistol and checked it; magazine full, a round in the
chamber, safety on.

"Put that horrid thing out of sight!" Anthony gasped. "The ... the other
thing ... is what you want to use."

"The bomb won't be any good if some of his guards come in before the
field re-builds," Benson said.

"He has no guards. He lives absolutely alone. We told you...."

"I know you did. You probably believed it, too. I don't. And by the way,
you're sending me forward. What do you do about the fact that a
time-jump seems to make me pass out?"

"Here. Before you press the button, swallow it." Gregory gave him a
small blue pill.

"Well, I guess that's all there is," Gregory continued. "I hope...." His
face twitched, and he dropped to the floor with a thud. Carl and Walter
came forward, dragged him away from the machine.

"Conditioning got him. Getting me, too," Walter said. "Hurry up, man!"

Benson swallowed the pill, pressed the button and stepped back into the
red circle, drawing his pistol and snapping off the safety. The blue
mist closed in on him.

       *       *       *       *       *

This time, however, it did not thicken into blackness. It became
luminous, brightening to a dazzle and dimming again to a colored mist,
and then it cleared, while Benson stood at raise pistol, as though on a
target range. He was facing a big desk at twenty feet, across a
thick-piled blue rug. There was a man seated at the desk, a white-haired
man with a mustache and a small beard, who wore a loose coat of some
glossy plum-brown fabric, and a vividly blue neck-scarf.

The pistol centered on the v-shaped blue under his chin. Deliberately,
Benson squeezed, recovered from the recoil, aimed, fired, recovered,
aimed, fired. Five seconds gone. The old man slumped across the desk,
his arms extended. Better make a good job of it, six, seven, eight
seconds; he stepped forward to the edge of the desk, call that fifteen
seconds, and put the muzzle to the top of the man's head, firing again
and snapping on the safety. There had been something familiar about The
Guide's face, but it was too late to check on that, now. There wasn't
any face left; not even much head.

A box, on the desk, caught Benson's eye, a cardboard box with an
envelope, stamped _Top Secret! For the Guide Only!_ taped to it. He
holstered his pistol and caught that up, stuffing it into his pocket, in
obedience to an instinct to grab anything that looked like intelligence
matter while in the enemy's country. Then he stepped back to the spot
where the field had deposited him. He had ten seconds to spare; somebody
was banging on a door when the blue mist began to gather around him.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was crouching, the spherical plastic object in his right hand, his
thumb over the button, when the field collapsed. Sure enough, right in
front of him, so close that he could smell the very heat of it, was the
big tank with the red star on its turret. He cursed the sextet of
sanctimonious double-crossers eight thousand miles and fifty years away
in space-time. The machine guns had stopped--probably because they
couldn't be depressed far enough to aim at him, now; that was a
notorious fault of some of the newer Pan-Soviet tanks--and he rocked
back on his heels, pressed the button, and heaved, closing his eyes. As
the thing left his fingers, he knew that he had thrown too hard. His
muscles, accustomed to the heavier cast-iron grenades of his experience,
had betrayed him. For a moment, he was closer to despair than at any
other time in the whole phantasmagoric adventure. Then he was hit, with
physical violence, by a wave of almost solid heat. It didn't smell like
the heat of the tank's engines; it smelled like molten metal, with
undertones of burned flesh. Immediately, there was a multiple explosion
that threw him flat, as the tank's ammunition went up. There were no
screams. It was too fast for that. He opened his eyes.

The turret and top armor of the tank had vanished. The two massive
treads had been toppled over, one to either side. The body had collapsed
between them, and it was running sticky trickles of molten metal. He
blinked, rubbed his eyes on the back of his hand, and looked again. Of
all the many blasted and burned-out tanks, Soviet and UN, that he had
seen, this was the most completely wrecked thing in his experience. And
he'd done that with one grenade....

       *       *       *       *       *

At that moment, there was a sudden rushing overhead, and an instant
later the barrage began falling beyond the crest of the ridge. He looked
at his watch, blinked, and looked again. That barrage was due at 0550;
according to the watch, it was 0726. He was sure that, ten minutes ago,
when he had looked at it, up there at the head of the ravine, it had
been twenty minutes to six. He puzzled about that for a moment, and
decided that he must have caught the stem on something and pulled it
out, and then twisted it a little, setting the watch ahead. Then,
somehow, the stem had gotten pushed back in, starting it at the new
setting. That was a pretty far-fetched explanation, but it was the only
one he could think of.

But about this tank, now. He was positive that he could remember
throwing a grenade.... Yet he'd used his last grenade back there at the
supply dump. He saw his carbine, and picked it up. That silly blackout
he'd had, for a second, there; he must have dropped it. Action was open,
empty magazine on the ground where he'd dropped it. He wondered,
stupidly, if one of his bullets couldn't have gone down the muzzle of
the tank's gun and exploded the shell in the chamber.... Oh, the hell
with it! The tank might have been hit by a premature shot from the
barrage which was raging against the far slope of the ridge. He reset
his watch by guess and looked down the valley. The big attack would be
starting any minute, now, and there would be fleeing Commies coming up
the valley ahead of the UN advance. He'd better get himself placed
before they started coming in on him.

He stopped thinking about the mystery of the blown-up tank, a solution
to which seemed to dance maddeningly just out of his mental reach, and
found himself a place among the rocks to wait. Down the valley he could
hear everything from pistols to mortars going off, and shouting in three
or four racial intonations. After a while, fugitive Communists began
coming, many of them without their equipment, stumbling in their haste
and looking back over their shoulders. Most of them avoided the mouth
of the ravine and hurried by to the left or right, but one little clump,
eight or ten, came up the dry stream-bed, and stopped a hundred and
fifty yards from his hiding-place to make a stand. They were Hindus,
with outsize helmets over their turbans. Two of them came ahead,
carrying a machine gun, followed by a third with a flame-thrower; the
others retreated more slowly, firing their rifles to delay pursuit.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cuddling the stock of his carbine to his cheek, he divided a ten-shot
burst between the two machine-gunners, then, as a matter of principle,
he shot the man with the flame-thrower. He had a dislike for
flame-throwers; he killed every enemy he found with one. The others
dropped their rifles and raised their hands, screaming: "Hey, Joe! Hey,
Joe! You no shoot, me no shoot!"

A dozen men in UN battledress came up and took them prisoner. Benson
shouted to them, and then rose and came down to join them. They were
British--Argyle and Sutherland Highlanders, advertising the fact by
inconspicuous bits of tartan on their uniforms. The subaltern in command
looked at him and nodded.

"Captain Benson? We were warned to be on watch for your patrol," he
said. "Any of the rest of you lads get out?"

Benson shrugged. "We split up after the attack. You may run into a
couple of them. Some are locals and don't speak very good English. I've
got to get back to Division, myself; what's the best way?"

"Down that way. You'll overtake a couple of our walking wounded. If you
don't mind going slowly, they'll show you the way to advance dressing
station, and you can hitch a ride on an ambulance from there."

Benson nodded. Off on the left, there was a flurry of small-arms fire,
ending in yells of "Hey, Joe! Hey, Joe!"--the World War IV version of
"Kamarad"!

       *       *       *       *       *

His company was a non-T/O outfit; he came directly under Division
command and didn't have to bother reporting to any regimental or brigade
commanders. He walked for an hour with half a dozen lightly wounded
Scots, rode for another hour on a big cat-truck loaded with casualties
of six regiments and four races, and finally reached Division Rear,
where both the Division and Corps commanders took time to compliment him
on the part his last hunter patrol had played in the now complete
breakthrough. His replacement, an equine-faced Spaniard with an imposing
display of fruit-salad, was there, too; he solemnly took off the
bracelet a refugee Caucasian goldsmith had made for his predecessor's
predecessor and gave it to the new commander of what had formerly been
Benson's Butchers. As he had expected, there was also another medal
waiting for him.

A medical check at Task Force Center got him a warning; his last patrol
had brought him dangerously close to the edge of combat fatigue.
Remembering the incidents of the tank and the unaccountably fast watch,
and the mysterious box and envelope which he had found in his coat
pocket, he agreed, saying nothing about the questions that were puzzling
him. The Psychological Department was never too busy to refuse another
case; they hunted patients gleefully, each psych-shark seeking in every
one proof of his own particular theories. It was with relief that he
watched them fill out the red tag which gave him a priority on jet
transports for home.

Ankara to Alexandria, Alexandria to Dakar, Dakar to Belém, Belém to the
shattered skyline of New York, the "hurry-and-wait" procedures at Fort
Carlisle, and, after the usual separation promotion, Major Fred Benson,
late of Benson's Butchers, was back at teaching high school juniors the
difference between H_{2}O and H_{2}SO_{4}.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were two high schools in the city: McKinley High, on the east
side, and Dwight Eisenhower High, on the west. A few blocks from
McKinley was the Tulip Tavern, where the Eisenhower teachers came in the
late afternoons; the McKinley faculty crossed town to do their
after-school drinking on the west side. When Benson entered the Tulip
Tavern, on a warm September afternoon, he found Bill Myers, the school
psychologist, at one of the tables, smoking his pipe, checking over a
stack of aptitude test forms, and drinking beer. He got a highball at
the bar and carried it over to Bill's table.

"Oh, hi, Fred." The psychologist separated the finished from the
unfinished work with a sheet of yellow paper and crammed the whole
business into his brief case. "I was hoping somebody'd show up...."

Benson lit a cigarette, sipped his highball. They talked at
random--school-talk; the progress of the war, now in its twelfth year;
personal reminiscences, of the Turkish Theater where Benson had served,
and the Madras Beachhead, where Myers had been.

"Bring home any souvenirs?" Myers asked.

"Not much. Couple of pistols, couple of knives, some pictures. I don't
remember what all; haven't gotten around to unpacking them, yet.... I
have a sixth of rye and some beer, at my rooms. Let's go around and see
what I did bring home."

They finished their drinks and went out.

"What the devil's that?" Myers said, pointing to the cardboard box with
the envelope taped to it, when Benson lifted it out of the gray-green
locker.

"Bill, I don't know," Benson said. "I found it in the pocket of my coat,
on my way back from my last hunter patrol.... I've never told anybody
about this, before."

"That's the damnedest story I've ever heard, and in my racket you hear
some honeys," Myers said, when he had finished. "You couldn't have
picked that thing up in some other way, deliberately forgotten the
circumstances, and fabricated this story about the tank and the grenade
and the discrepancy in your watch subconsciously as an explanation?"

"My subconscious is a better liar than that," Benson replied. "It
would have cobbled up some kind of a story that would stand up. This
business...."

"Top Secret! For the Guide Only!" Myers frowned. "That isn't one of our
marks, and if it were Soviet, it'd be tri-lingual, Russian, Hindi and
Chinese."

"Well, let's see what's in it. I want this thing cleared up. I've been
having some of the nastiest dreams, lately...."

"Well, be careful; it may be booby-trapped," Myers said urgently.

"Don't worry; I will."

He used a knife to slice the envelope open without untaping it from the
box, and exposed five sheets of typewritten onion-skin paper. There was
no letterhead, no salutation or address-line. Just a mass of chemical
formulae, and a concise report on tests. It seemed to be a report on an
improved syrup for a carbonated soft-drink. There were a few cryptic
cautionary references to heightened physico-psychological effects.

The box was opened with the same caution, but it proved as innocent of
dangers as the envelope. It contained only a half-liter bottle,
wax-sealed, containing a dark reddish-brown syrup.

"There's a lot of this stuff I don't dig," Benson said, tapping the
sheets of onion-skin. "I don't even scratch the surface of this
rigamarole about The Guide. I'm going to get to work on this sample in
the lab, at school, though. Maybe we have something, here."

       *       *       *       *       *

At eight-thirty the next evening, after four and a half hours work, he
stopped to check what he had found out.

The school's X-ray, an excellent one, had given him a complete picture
of the molecular structure of the syrup. There were a couple of
long-chain molecules that he could only believe after two
re-examinations and a careful check of the machine, but with the help of
the notes he could deduce how they had been put together. They would be
the Ingredient Alpha and Ingredient Beta referred to in the notes.

The components of the syrup were all simple and easily procurable with
these two exceptions, as were the basic components from which these were
made.

The mechanical guinea-pig demonstrated that the syrup contained nothing
harmful to human tissue.

Of course, there were the warnings about heightened psycho-physiological
effects....

He stuck a poison-label on the bottle, locked it up, and went home. The
next day, he and Bill Myers got a bottle of carbonated water and mixed
themselves a couple of drinks of it. It was delicious--sweet, dry, tart,
sour, all of these in alternating waves of pleasure.

"We do have something, Bill," he said. "We have something that's going
to give our income-tax experts headaches."

"You have," Myers corrected. "Where do you start fitting me into it?"

"We're a good team, Bill. I'm a chemist, but I don't know a thing about
people. You're a psychologist. A real one; not one of these night-school
boys. A juvenile psychologist, too. And what age-group spends the most
money in this country for soft-drinks?"

Knowing the names of the syrup's ingredients, and what their molecular
structure was like, was only the beginning. Gallon after gallon of the
School Board's chemicals went down the laboratory sink; Fred Benson and
Bill Myers almost lived in the fourth floor lab. Once or twice there
were head-shaking warnings from the principal about the dangers of
over-work. The watchmen, at all hours, would hear the occasional
twanging of Benson's guitar in the laboratory, and know that he had come
to a dead end on something and was trying to think. Football season came
and went; basketball season; the inevitable riot between McKinley and
Eisenhower rooters; the Spring concerts. The term-end exams were only a
month away when Benson and Myers finally did it, and stood solemnly,
each with a beaker in either hand and took alternate sips of the
original and the drink mixed from the syrup they had made.

"Not a bit of difference, Fred," Myers said. "We have it!"

Benson picked up the guitar and began plunking on it.

"Hey!" Myers exclaimed. "Have you been finding time to take lessons on
that thing? I never heard you play as well as that!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They decided to go into business in St. Louis. It was centrally located,
and, being behind more concentric circles of radar and counter-rocket
defenses, it was in better shape than any other city in the country and
most likely to stay that way. Getting started wasn't hard; the first
banker who tasted the new drink-named Evri-Flave, at Myers'
suggestion--couldn't dig up the necessary money fast enough. Evri-Flave
hit the market with a bang and became an instant success; soon the
rainbow-tinted vending machines were everywhere, dispensing the
slender, slightly flattened bottles and devouring quarters voraciously.
In spite of high taxes and the difficulties of doing business in a
consumers' economy upon which a war-time economy had been superimposed,
both Myers and Benson were rapidly becoming wealthy. The gregarious
Myers installed himself in a luxurious apartment in the city; Benson
bought a large tract of land down the river toward Carondelet and
started building a home and landscaping the grounds.

The dreams began bothering him again, now that the urgency of getting
Evri-Flave, Inc., started had eased. They were not dreams of the men he
had killed in battle, or, except for one about a huge, hot-smelling tank
with a red star on the turret, about the war. Generally, they were about
a strange, beautiful, office-room, in which a young man in uniform
killed an older man in a plum-brown coat and a vivid blue neck-scarf.
Sometimes Benson identified himself with the killer; sometimes with the
old man who was killed.

He talked to Myers about these dreams, but beyond generalities about
delayed effects of combat fatigue and vague advice to relax, the
psychologist, now head of Sales & Promotion of Evri-Flave, Inc., could
give him no help.

The war ended three years after the new company was launched. There was
a momentary faltering of the economy, and then the work of
reconstruction was crying hungrily for all the labor and capital that
had been idled by the end of destruction, and more. There was a new
flood-tide of prosperity, and Evri-Flave rode the crest. The estate at
Carondelet was finished--a beautiful place, surrounded with gardens,
fragrant with flowers, full of the songs of birds and soft music from
concealed record-players. It made him forget the ugliness of the war,
and kept the dreams from returning so frequently. All the world ought to
be like that, he thought; beautiful and quiet and peaceful. People
surrounded with such beauty couldn't think about war.

All the world could be like that, if only....

       *       *       *       *       *

The UN chose St. Louis for its new headquarters--many of its offices had
been moved there after the second and most destructive bombing of New
York--and when the city by the Mississippi began growing into a real
World Capital, the flow of money into it almost squared overnight.
Benson began to take an active part in politics in the new World
Sovereignty party. He did not, however, allow his political activities
to distract him from the work of expanding the company to which he owed
his wealth and position. There were always things to worry about.

"I don't know," Myers said to him, one evening, as they sat over a
bottle of rye in the psychologist's apartment. "I could make almost as
much money practicing as a psychiatrist, these days. The whole world
seems to be going pure, unadulterated nuts! That affair in Munich, for
instance."

"Yes." Benson grimaced as he thought of the affair in Munich--a
Wagnerian concert which had terminated in an insane orgy of mass
suicide. "Just a week after we started our free-sample campaign in South
Germany, too...."

He stopped short, downing his drink and coughing over it.

"Bill! You remember those sheets of onion-skin in that envelope?"

"The foundation of our fortunes; I wonder where you really did get
that.... Fred!" His eyes widened in horror. "That caution about
'heightened psycho-physiological effects,' that we were never able
to understand!"

Benson nodded grimly. "And think of all the crazy cases of
mass-hysteria--that baseball-game riot in Baltimore; the time everybody
started tearing off each others' clothes in Milwaukee; the sex-orgy in
New Orleans. And the sharp uptrend in individual psycho-neurotic and
psychotic behavior. All in connection with music, too, and all after
Evri-Flave got on the market."

"We'll have to stop it; pull Evri-Flave off the market," Myers said. "We
can't be responsible for letting this go on."

"We can't stop, either. There's at least a two months' supply out in the
hands of jobbers and distributors over whom we have no control. And we
have all these contractual obligations, to buy the entire output of the
companies that make the syrup for us; if we stop buying, they can sell
it in competition with us, as long as they don't infringe our
trade-name. And we can't prevent pirating. You know how easily we were
able to duplicate that sample I brought back from Turkey. Why, our legal
department's kept busy all the time prosecuting unlicensed manufacturers
as it is."

"We've got to do something, Fred!" There was almost a whiff of hysteria
in Myers' voice.

"We will. We'll start, first thing tomorrow, on a series of tests--just
you and I, like the old times at Eisenhower High. First, we want to
be sure that Evri-Flave really is responsible. It'd be a hell of a
thing if we started a public panic against our own product for nothing.
And then...."

       *       *       *       *       *

It took just two weeks, in a soundproofed and guarded laboratory on
Benson's Carondelet estate, to convict their delicious drink of
responsibility for that Munich State Opera House Horror and everything
else. Reports from confidential investigators in Munich confirmed this.
It had, of course, been impossible to interview the two thousand men
and women who had turned the Opera House into a pyre for their own
immolation, but none of the tiny minority who had kept their sanity and
saved their lives had tasted Evri-Flave.

       *       *       *       *       *

It took another month to find out exactly how the stuff affected the
human nervous system, and they almost wrecked their own nervous systems
in the process. The real villain, they discovered, was the
incredible-looking long-chain compound alluded to in the original notes
as Ingredient Beta; its principal physiological effect was to greatly
increase the sensitivity of the aural nerves. Not only was the hearing
range widened--after consuming thirty CC of Beta, they could hear the
sound of an ultrasonic dog-whistle quite plainly--but the very quality
of all audible sounds was curiously enhanced and altered. Myers, the
psychologist, who was also well grounded in neurology, explained how the
chemical produced this effect; it meant about as much to Benson as some
of his chemistry did to Bill Myers. There was also a secondary, purely
psychological, effect. Certain musical chords had definite effects on
the emotions of the hearer, and the subject, beside being directly
influenced by the music, was rendered extremely open to verbal
suggestions accompanied by a suitable musical background.

Benson transferred the final results of this stage of the research to
the black notebook and burned the scratch-sheets.

"That's how it happened, then," he said. "The Munich thing was the
result of all that Götterdämmerung music. There was a band at the
baseball park in Baltimore. The New Orleans Orgy started while a local
radio station was broadcasting some of this new dance-music. Look, these
tone-clusters, here, have a definite sex-excitation effect. This series
of six chords, which occur in some of the Wagnerian stuff; effect, a
combined feeling of godlike isolation and despair. And these consecutive
fifths--a sense of danger, anger, combativeness. You know, we could work
out a whole range of emotional stimuli to fit the effects of Ingredient
Beta...."

"We don't want to," Myers said. "We want to work out a substitute for
Beta that will keep the flavor of the drink without the
psycho-physiological effects."

"Yes, sure. I have some of the boys at the plant lab working on that.
Gave them a lot of syrup without Beta, and told them to work out cheap
additives to restore the regular Evri-Flave taste; told them it was an
effort to find a cheap substitute for an expensive ingredient. But look,
Bill. You and I both see, for instance, that a powerful world-wide
supra-national sovereignty is the only guarantee of world peace. If we
could use something like this to help overcome antiquated verbal
prejudices and nationalistic emotional attachments...."

"No!" Myers said. "I won't ever consent to anything like that, Fred! Not
even in a cause like world peace; use a thing like this for a good,
almost holy, cause now, and tomorrow we, or those who would come after
us, would be using it to create a tyranny. You know what year this is,
Bill?"

"Why, 1984," Benson said.

"Yes. You remember that old political novel of Orwell's, written about
forty years ago? Well, that's a picture of the kind of world you'd have,
eventually, no matter what kind of a world you started out to make.
Fred, don't ever think of using this stuff for a purpose like that. If
you try it, I'll fight you with every resource I have."

There was a fanatical, almost murderous, look in Bill Myers' eyes.
Benson put the notebook in his pocket, then laughed and threw up his
hands.

"Hey, Joe! Hey, Joe!" he cried. "You're right, of course, Bill. We can't
even trust the UN with a thing like this. It makes the H-bomb look like
a stone hatchet.... Well, I'll call Grant, at the plant lab, and see how
his boys are coming along with the substitute; as soon as we get it, we
can put out a confidential letter to all our distributors and
syrup-manufacturers...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He walked alone in the garden at Carondelet, watching the color fade out
of the sky and the twilight seep in among the clipped yews. All the
world could be like this garden, a place of peace and beauty and quiet,
if only.... All the world _would_ be a beautiful and peaceful garden, in
his own lifetime! He had the means of making it so!

Three weeks later, he murdered his friend and partner, Bill Myers. It
was a suicide; nobody but Fred Benson knew that he had taken fifty CC of
pure Ingredient Beta in a couple of cocktails while listening to the
queer phonograph record that he had played half an hour before blowing
his brains out.

The decision had cost Benson a battle with his conscience from which he
had emerged the sole survivor. The conscience was buried along with Bill
Myers, and all that remained was a purpose.

Evri-Flave stayed on the market unaltered. The night before the national
election, the World Sovereignty party distributed thousands of gallons
of Evri-Flave; their speakers, on every radio and television network,
were backgrounded by soft music. The next day, when the vote was
counted, it was found that the American Nationalists had carried a few
backwoods precincts in the Rockies and the Southern Appalachians and one
county in Alaska, where there had been no distribution of Evri-Flave.

The dreams came back more often, now that Bill Myers was gone. Benson
was only beginning to realize what a large fact in his life the
companionship of the young psychologist had been. Well, a world of peace
and beauty was an omelet worth the breaking of many eggs....

He purchased another great tract of land near the city, and donated it
to the UN for their new headquarters buildings; the same architects and
landscapists who had created the estate at Carondelet were put to work
on it. In the middle of what was to become World City, they erected a
small home for Fred Benson. Benson was often invited to address the
delegates to the UN; always, there was soft piped-in music behind his
words. He saw to it that Evri-Flave was available free to all UN
personnel. The Senate of the United States elected him as perpetual
U. S. delegate-in-chief to the UN; not long after, the Security Council
elected him their perpetual chairman.

In keeping with his new dignities, and to ameliorate his youthful
appearance, he grew a mustache and, eventually, a small beard. The black
notebook in which he kept the records of his experiments was always with
him; page after page was filled with notes. Experiments in sonics, like
the one which had produced the ultrasonic stun-gun which rendered lethal
weapons unnecessary for police and defense purposes, or the new musical
combinations with which he was able to play upon every emotion and
instinct.

But he still dreamed, the same recurring dream of the young soldier and
the old man in the office. By now, he was consistently identifying
himself with the latter. He took to carrying one of the thick-barrelled
stun-pistols always, now. Alone, he practiced constantly with it,
drawing, breaking soap-bubbles with the concentrated sound-waves it
projected. It was silly, perhaps, but it helped him in his dreams. Now,
the old man with whom he identified himself would draw a stun-pistol,
occasionally, to defend himself.

The years drained one by one through the hour-glass of Time. Year after
year, the world grew more peaceful, more beautiful. There were no more
incidents like the mass-suicide of Munich or the mass-perversions of New
Orleans; the playing and even the composing of music was strictly
controlled--no dangerous notes or chords could be played in a world
drenched with Ingredient Beta. Steadily the idea grew that peace and
beauty were supremely good, that violence and ugliness were supremely
evil. Even competitive sports which simulated violence; even children
born ugly and misshapen....

       *       *       *       *       *

He finished the breakfast which he had prepared for himself--he trusted
no food that another had touched--and knotted the vivid blue scarf about
his neck before slipping into the loose coat of glossy plum-brown, then
checked the stun-pistol and pocketed the black notebook, its
plastileather cover glossy from long use. He stood in front of the
mirror, brushing his beard, now snow-white. Two years, now, and he would
be eighty--had he been anyone but The Guide, he would have long ago
retired to the absolute peace and repose of one of the Elders' Havens.
Peace and repose, however, were not for The Guide; it would take another
twenty years to finish his task of remaking the world, and he would need
every day of it that his medical staff could borrow or steal for him. He
made an eye-baffling practice draw with the stun-pistol, then holstered
it and started down the spiral stairway to the office below.

There was the usual mass of papers on his desk. A corps of secretaries
had screened out everything but what required his own personal and
immediate attention, but the business of guiding a world could only be
reduced to a certain point. On top was the digest of the world's news
for the past twenty-four hours, and below that was the agenda for the
afternoon's meeting of the Council. He laid both in front of him,
reading over the former and occasionally making a note on the latter.
Once his glance strayed to the cardboard box in front of him, with the
envelope taped to it--the latest improvement on the Evri-Flave syrup,
with the report from his own chemists, all conditioned to obedience,
loyalty and secrecy. If they thought he was going to try that damned
stuff on himself....

There was a sudden gleam of light in the middle of the room, in front of
his desk. No, a mist, through which a blue light seemed to shine. The
stun-pistol was in his hand--his instinctive reaction to anything
unusual--and pointed into the shining mist when it vanished and a man
appeared in front of him; a man in the baggy green combat-uniform that
he himself had worn fifty years before; a man with a heavy automatic
pistol in his hand. The gun was pointed directly at him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Guide aimed quickly and pressed the trigger of the ultrasonic
stunner. The pistol dropped soundlessly on the thick-piled rug; the man
in uniform slumped in an inert heap. The Guide sprang to his feet and
rounded the desk, crossing to and bending over the intruder. Why, this
was the dream that had plagued him through the years. But it was ending
differently. The young man--his face was startlingly familiar,
somehow--was not killing the old man. Those years of practice with the
stun-pistol....

He stooped and picked the automatic up. The young man was unconscious,
and The Guide had his pistol, now. He slipped the automatic into his
pocket and straightened beside his inert would-be slayer.

A shimmering globe of blue mist appeared around them, brightened to a
dazzle, and dimmed again to a colored mist before it vanished, and when
it cleared away, he was standing beside the man in uniform, in the sandy
bed of a dry stream at the mouth of a little ravine, and directly in
front of him, looming above him, was a thing that had not been seen in
the world for close to half a century--a big, hot-smelling tank with a
red star on its turret.

He might have screamed--the din of its treads and engines deafened
him--and, in panic, he turned and ran, his old legs racing, his old
heart pumping madly. The noise of the tank increased as machine guns
joined the uproar. He felt the first bullet strike him, just above the
hips--no pain; just a tremendous impact. He might have felt the second
bullet, too, as the ground tilted and rushed up at his face. Then he was
diving into a tunnel of blackness that had no end....

       *       *       *       *       *

Captain Fred Benson, of Benson's Butchers, had been jerked back into
consciousness when the field began to build around him. He was
struggling to rise, fumbling the grenade out of his pocket, when it
collapsed. Sure enough, right in front of him, so close that he could
smell the very heat of it, was the big tank with the red star on its
turret. He cursed the sextet of sanctimonious double-crossers eight
thousand miles and fifty years away in space-time. The machine guns had
stopped--probably because they couldn't be depressed far enough to aim
at him, now; that was a notorious fault of some of the newer Pan-Soviet
tanks. He had the bomb out of his pocket, when the machine guns began
firing again, this time at something on his left. Wondering what had
created the diversion, he rocked back on his heels, pressed the button,
and heaved, closing his eyes. As the thing left his fingers, he knew
that he had thrown too hard. His muscles, accustomed to the heavier
cast-iron grenades, had betrayed him. For a moment, he was closer to
despair than at any other time in the whole phantasmagoric adventure.
Then he was hit, with physical force, by a wave of almost solid heat. It
didn't smell like the heat of the tank's engines; it smelled like molten
metal, with undertones of burned flesh. Immediately, there was a
multiple explosion that threw him flat, as the tank's ammunition went
up. There were no screams. It was too fast for that. He opened his eyes.

The turret and top armor of the tank had vanished. The two massive
treads had been toppled over, one to either side. The body had collapsed
between them, and it was running sticky trickles of molten metal. He
blinked, rubbed his eyes on the back of his hand, and looked again. Of
all the many blasted and burned-out tanks, Soviet and UN, that he had
seen, this was the most completely wrecked thing in his experience. And
he'd done that with one grenade....

Remembering the curious manner in which, at the last, the tank had begun
firing at something to the side, he looked around, to see the crumpled
body in the pale violet-gray trousers and the plum-brown coat. Finding
his carbine and reloading it, he went over to the dead man, turning the
body over. He was an old man, with a white mustache and a small white
beard--why, if the mustache were smaller and there were no beard, he
would pass for Benson's own father, who had died in 1962. The clothes
weren't Turkish or Armenian or Persian, or anything one would expect in
this country.

The old man had a pistol in his coat pocket, and Benson pulled it out
and looked at it, then did a double-take and grabbed for his own
holster, to find it empty. The pistol was his own 9.5 Colt automatic. He
looked at the dead man, with the white beard and the vivid blue
neck-scarf, and he was sure that he had never seen him before. He'd had
that pistol when he'd come down the ravine....

There was another pistol under the dead man's coat, in a
shoulder-holster; a queer thing with a thick round barrel, like an old
percussion pepper-box, and a diaphragm instead of a muzzle. Probably
projected ultrasonic waves. He holstered his own Colt and pocketed the
unknown weapon. There was a black plastileather-bound notebook. It was
full of notes. Chemical formulae, yes, and some stuff on sonics; that
tied in with the queer pistol. He pocketed that. He'd look both over,
when he had time and privacy, two scarce commodities in the Army....

       *       *       *       *       *

At that moment, there was a sudden rushing overhead, and an instant
later, the barrage began falling beyond the crest of the ridge. He
looked at his watch, blinked, and looked again. That barrage was due at
0550; according to his watch, it was 0726. That was another mystery, to
go with the question of who the dead man was, where he had come from,
and how he'd gotten hold of Benson's pistol. Yes, and how that tank had
gotten blown up. Benson was sure he had used his last grenade back at
the supply-dump.

The hell with it; he'd worry about all that later. The attack was due
any minute, now, and there would be fleeing Commies coming up the valley
ahead, of the UN advance. He'd better get himself placed before they
started coming in on him.

He stopped thinking about the multiple mystery, a solution to which
seemed to dance maddeningly just out of his mental reach, and found
himself a place among the rocks to wait, and while he waited, he looked
over the plastileather-bound notebook. In civil life, he had been a
high school chemistry teacher, but the stuff in this book was utterly
new to him. Some of it he could understand readily enough; the rest of
it he could dig out for himself. Stuff about some kind of a carbonated
soft-drink, and about a couple of unbelievable-looking long-chain
molecules....

After a while, fugitive Communists began coming up the valley to make
their stand.

Benson put away the notebook, picked up his carbine, and cuddled the
stock to his cheek....

_BOOKEND_



1


But yesterday, a whole planet had shouted: _Hail Hradzka! Hail the
Leader!_ Today, they were screaming: _Death to Hradzka! Kill the
tyrant!_

The Palace, where Hradzka, surrounded by his sycophants and guards, had
lorded it over a solar system, was now an inferno. Those who had been
too closely identified with the dictator's rule to hope for forgiveness
were fighting to the last, seeking only a quick death in combat; one by
one, their isolated points of resistance were being wiped out. The
corridors and chambers of the huge palace were thronged with rebels,
loud with their shouts, and with the rasping hiss of heat-beams and the
crash of blasters, reeking with the stench of scorched plastic and
burned flesh, of hot metal and charred fabric. The living quarters were
overrun; the mob smashed down walls and tore up floors in search of
secret hiding-places. They found strange things--the space-ship that had
been built under one of the domes, in readiness for flight to the
still-loyal colonies on Mars or the Asteroid Belt, for instance--but
Hradzka himself they could not find.

At last, the search reached the New Tower which reared its head five
thousand feet above the palace, the highest thing in the city. They
blasted down the huge steel doors, cut the power from the
energy-screens. They landed from antigrav-cars on the upper levels. But
except for barriers of metal and concrete and energy, they met with no
opposition. Finally, they came to the spiral stairway which led up to
the great metal sphere which capped the whole structure.

General Zarvas, the Army Commander who had placed himself at the head of
the revolt, stood with his foot on the lowest step, his followers behind
him. There was Prince Burvanny, the leader of the old nobility, and
Ghorzesko Orhm, the merchant, and between them stood Tobbh, the
chieftain of the mutinous slaves. There were clerks; laborers; poor but
haughty nobles: and wealthy merchants who had long been forced to hide
their riches from the dictator's tax-gatherers, and soldiers, and
spacemen.

"You'd better let some of us go first sir," General Zarvas' orderly, a
blood-stained bandage about his head, his uniform in rags, suggested.
"You don't know what might be up there."

The General shook his head. "I'll go first." Zarvas Pol was not the man
to send subordinates into danger ahead of himself. "To tell the truth,
I'm afraid we won't find anything at all up there."

"You mean...?" Ghorzesko Orhm began.

"The 'time-machine'," Zarvas Pol replied. "If he's managed to get it
finished, the Great Mind only knows where he may be, now. Or when."

He loosened the blaster in his holster and started up the long spiral.
His followers spread out, below; sharp-shooters took position to cover
his ascent. Prince Burvanny and Tobbh the Slave started to follow him.
They hesitated as each motioned the other to precede him; then the
nobleman followed the general, his blaster drawn, and the brawny slave
behind him.

The door at the top was open, and Zarvas Pol stepped through but there
was nothing in the great spherical room except a raised dais some fifty
feet in diameter, its polished metal top strangely clean and empty. And
a crumpled heap of burned cloth and charred flesh that had, not long
ago, been a man. An old man with a white beard, and the seven-pointed
star of the Learned Brothers on his breast, advanced to meet the armed
intruders.

"So he is gone, Kradzy Zago?" Zarvas Pol said, holstering his weapon.
"Gone in the 'time-machine', to hide in yesterday or tomorrow. And you
let him go?"

The old one nodded. "He had a blaster, and I had none." He indicated the
body on the floor. "Zoldy Jarv had no blaster, either, but he tried to
stop Hradzka. See, he squandered his life as a fool squanders his money,
getting nothing for it. And a man's life is not money, Zarvas Pol."

"I do not blame you, Kradzy Zago," General Zarvas said. "But now you
must get to work, and build us another 'time-machine', so that we can
hunt him down."

"Does revenge mean so much to you, then?"

The soldier made an impatient gesture. "Revenge is for fools, like that
pack of screaming beasts below. I do not kill for revenge; I kill
because dead men do no harm."

"Hradzka will do us no more harm," the old scientist replied. "He is a
thing of yesterday; of a time long past and half-lost in the mists of
legend."

"No matter. As long as he exists, at any point in space-time, Hradzka is
still a threat. Revenge means much to Hradzka; he will return for it,
when we least expect him."

The old man shook his head. "No, Zarvas Pol, Hradzka will not return."

       *       *       *       *       *

Hradzka holstered his blaster, threw the switch that sealed the
"time-machine", put on the antigrav-unit and started the time-shift
unit. He reached out and set the destination-dial for the
mid-Fifty-Second Century of the Atomic Era. That would land him in the
Ninth Age of Chaos, following the Two-Century War and the collapse of
the World Theocracy. A good time for his purpose: the world would be
slipping back into barbarism, and yet possess the technologies of former
civilizations. A hundred little national states would be trying to
regain social stability, competing and warring with one another. Hradzka
glanced back over his shoulder at the cases of books, record-spools,
tri-dimensional pictures, and scale-models. These people of the past
would welcome him and his science of the future, would make him their
leader.

He would start in a small way, by taking over the local feudal or tribal
government, would arm his followers with weapons of the future. Then he
would impose his rule upon neighboring tribes, or princedoms, or
communes, or whatever, and build a strong sovereignty; from that he
envisioned a world empire, a Solar System empire.

Then, he would build "time-machines", many "time-machines". He would
recruit an army such as the universe had never seen, a swarm of men from
every age in the past. At that point, he would return to the Hundredth
Century of the Atomic Era, to wreak vengeance upon those who had risen
against him. A slow smile grew on Hradzka's thin lips as he thought of
the tortures with which he would put Zarvas Pol to death.

He glanced up at the great disc of the indicator and frowned. Already he
was back to the year 7500, A.E., and the temporal-displacement had not
begun to slow. The disc was turning even more rapidly--7000, 6000, 5500;
he gasped slightly. Then he had passed his destination; he was now in
the Fortieth Century, but the indicator was slowing. The hairline
crossed the Thirtieth Century, the Twentieth, the Fifteenth, the Tenth.
He wondered what had gone wrong, but he had recovered from his fright by
this time. When this insane machine stopped, as it must around the First
Century of the Atomic Era, he would investigate, make repairs, then
shift forward to his target-point. Hradzka was determined upon the
Fifty-Second Century; he had made a special study of the history of that
period, had learned the language spoken then, and he understood the
methods necessary to gain power over the natives of that time.

The indicator-disc came to a stop, in the First Century. He switched on
the magnifier and leaned forward to look; he had emerged into normal
time in the year 10 of the Atomic Era, a decade after the first
uranium-pile had gone into operation, and seven years after the first
atomic bombs had been exploded in warfare. The altimeter showed that he
was hovering at eight thousand feet above ground-level.

Slowly, he cut out the antigrav, letting the "time machine" down easily.
He knew that there had been no danger of materializing inside anything;
the New Tower had been built to put it above anything that had occupied
that space-point at any moment within history, or legend, or even the
geological knowledge of man. What lay below, however, was uncertain. It
was night--the visi-screen showed only a star-dusted, moonless-sky, and
dark shadows below. He snapped another switch; for a few micro-seconds a
beam of intense light was turned on, automatically photographing the
landscape under him. A second later, the developed picture was projected
upon another screen; it showed only wooded mountains and a barren,
brush-grown valley.

       *       *       *       *       *

The "time-machine" came to rest with a soft jar and a crashing of broken
bushes that was audible through the sound pickup. Hradzka pulled the
main switch; there was a click as the shielding went out and the door
opened. A breath of cool night air drew into the hollow sphere.

Then there was a loud _bang_ inside the mechanism, and a flash of
blue-white light which turned to pinkish flame with a nasty crackling.
Curls of smoke began to rise from the square black box that housed the
"time-shift" mechanism, and from behind the instrument-board. In a
moment, everything was glowing-hot: driblets of aluminum and silver were
running down from the instruments. Then the whole interior of the
"time-machine" was afire; there was barely time for Hradzka to leap
through the open door.

The brush outside impeded him, and he used his blaster to clear a path
for himself away from the big sphere, which was now glowing faintly on
the outside. The heat grew in intensity, and the brush outside was
taking fire. It was not until he had gotten two hundred yards from the
machine that he stopped, realizing what had happened.

The machine, of course, had been sabotaged. That would have been young
Zoldy, whom he had killed, or that old billy-goat, Kradzy Zago; the
latter, most likely. He cursed both of them for having marooned him in
this savage age, at the very beginning of atomic civilization, with all
his printed and recorded knowledge destroyed. Oh, he could still gain
mastery over these barbarians; he knew enough to fashion a crude
blaster, or a heat-beam gun, or an atomic-electric conversion unit. But
without his books and records, he could never build an antigrav unit,
and the secret of the "temporal shift" was lost.

For "Time" is not an object, or a medium which can be travelled along.
The "Time-Machine" was not a vehicle; it was a mechanical process of
displacement within the space-time continuum, and those who constructed
it knew that it could not be used with the sort of accuracy that the
dials indicated. Hradzka had ordered his scientists to produce a "Time
Machine", and they had combined the possible--displacement within the
space-time continuum--with the sort of fiction the dictator demanded,
for their own well-being. Even had there been no sabotage, his return to
his own "time" was nearly of zero probability.

The fire, spreading from the "time-machine", was blowing toward him; he
observed the wind-direction and hurried around out of the path of the
flames. The light enabled him to pick his way through the brush, and,
after crossing a small stream, he found a rutted road and followed it up
the mountainside until he came to a place where he could rest concealed
until morning.




2


It was broad daylight when he woke, and there was a strange throbbing
sound; Hradzka lay motionless under the brush where he had slept, his
blaster ready. In a few minutes, a vehicle came into sight, following
the road down the mountainside.

It was a large thing, four-wheeled, with a projection in front which
probably housed the engine and a cab for the operator. The body of the
vehicle was simply an open rectangular box. There were two men in the
cab, and about twenty or thirty more crowded into the box body. These
were dressed in faded and nondescript garments of blue and gray and
brown; all were armed with crude weapons--axes, bill-hooks, long-handled
instruments with serrated edges, and what looked like broad-bladed
spears. The vehicle itself, which seemed to be propelled by some sort of
chemical-explosion engine, was dingy and mud-splattered; the men in it
were ragged and unshaven. Hradzka snorted in contempt; they were
probably warriors of the local tribe, going to the fire in the belief
that it had been started by raiding enemies. When they found the
wreckage of the "time-machine", they would no doubt believe that it was
the chariot of some god and drag it home to be venerated.

A plan of action was taking shape in his mind. First, he must get
clothing of the sort worn by these people, and find a safe hiding-place
for his own things. Then, pretending to be a deaf-mute, he would go
among them to learn something of their customs and pick up the language.
When he had done that, he would move on to another tribe or village,
able to tell a credible story for himself. For a while, it would be
necessary for him to do menial work, but in the end, he would establish
himself among these people. Then he could gather around him a faction of
those who were dissatisfied with whatever conditions existed, organize a
conspiracy, make arms for his followers, and start his program of
power-seizure.

The matter of clothing was attended to shortly after he had crossed the
mountain and descended into the valley on the other side. Hearing a
clinking sound some distance from the road, as of metal striking stone,
Hradzka stole cautiously through the woods until he came within sight of
a man who was digging with a mattock, uprooting small bushes of a
particular sort, with rough gray bark and three-pointed leaves. When he
had dug one up, he would cut off the roots and then slice away the
root-bark with a knife, putting it into a sack. Hradzka's lip curled
contemptuously; the fellow was gathering the stuff for medicinal use. He
had heard of the use of roots and herbs for such purposes by the ancient
savages.

The blaster would be no use here; it was too powerful, and would destroy
the clothing that the man was wearing. He unfastened a strap from his
belt and attached it to a stone to form a hand-loop, then, inched
forward behind the lone herb-gatherer. When he was close enough, he
straightened and rushed forward, swinging his improvised weapon. The man
heard him and turned, too late.

       *       *       *       *       *

After undressing his victim, Hradzka used the mattock to finish him, and
then to dig a grave. The fugitive buried his own clothes with the
murdered man, and donned the faded blue shirt, rough shoes, worn
trousers and jacket. The blaster he concealed under the jacket, and he
kept a few other Hundredth Century gadgets; these he would hide
somewhere closer to his center of operations.

He had kept, among other things, a small box of food-concentrate
capsules, and in one pocket of the newly acquired jacket he found a
package containing food. It was rough and unappetizing fare--slices of
cold cooked meat between slices of some cereal substance. He ate these
before filling in the grave, and put the paper wrappings in with the
dead man. Then, his work finished, he threw the mattock into the brush
and set out again, grimacing disgustedly and scratching himself. The
clothing he had appropriated was verminous.

Crossing another mountain, he descended into a second valley, and, for a
time, lost his way among a tangle of narrow ravines. It was dark by the
time he mounted a hill and found himself looking down another valley, in
which a few scattered lights gave evidence of human habitations. Not
wishing to arouse suspicion by approaching these in the night-time, he
found a place among some young evergreens where he could sleep.

The next morning, having breakfasted on a concentrate capsule, he found
a hiding-place for his blaster in a hollow tree. It was in a
sufficiently prominent position so that he could easily find it again,
and at the same time unlikely to be discovered by some native. Then he
went down into the inhabited valley.

He was surprised at the ease with which he established contact with the
natives. The first dwelling which he approached, a cluster of
farm-buildings at the upper end of the valley, gave him shelter. There
was a man, clad in the same sort of rough garments Hradzka had taken
from the body of the herb-gatherer, and a woman in a faded and shapeless
dress. The man was thin and work-bent; the woman short and heavy. Both
were past middle age.

He made inarticulate sounds to attract their attention, then gestured to
his mouth and ears to indicate his assumed affliction. He rubbed his
stomach to portray hunger. Looking about, he saw an ax sticking in a
chopping-block, and a pile of wood near it, probably the fuel used by
these people. He took the ax, split up some of the wood, then repeated
the hunger-signs. The man and the woman both nodded, laughing; he was
shown a pile of tree-limbs, and the man picked up a short billet of wood
and used it like a measuring-rule, to indicate that all the wood was to
be cut to that length.

Hradzka fell to work, and by mid-morning, he had all the wood cut. He
had seen a circular stone, mounted on a trestle with a metal axle
through it, and judged it to be some sort of a grinding-wheel, since it
was fitted with a foot-pedal and a rusty metal can was set above it to
spill water onto the grinding-edge. After chopping the wood, he
carefully sharpened the ax, handing it to the man for inspection. This
seemed to please the man; he clapped Hradzka on the shoulder, making
commendatory sounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

It required considerable time and ingenuity to make himself a more or
less permanent member of the household. Hradzka had made a survey of the
farmyard, noting the sorts of work that would normally be performed on
the farm, and he pantomimed this work in its simpler operations. He
pointed to the east, where the sun would rise, and to the zenith, and to
the west. He made signs indicative of eating, and of sleeping, and of
rising, and of working. At length, he succeeded in conveying his
meaning.

There was considerable argument between the man and the woman, but his
proposal was accepted, as he expected that it would. It was easy to see
that the work of the farm was hard for this aging couple; now, for a
place to sleep and a little food, they were able to acquire a strong and
intelligent slave.

In the days that followed, he made himself useful to the farm people; he
fed the chickens and the livestock, milked the cow, worked in the
fields. He slept in a small room at the top of the house, under the
eaves, and ate with the man and woman in the farmhouse kitchen.

It was not long before he picked up a few words which he had heard his
employers using, and related them to the things or acts spoken of. And
he began to notice that these people, in spite of the crudities of their
own life, enjoyed some of the advantages of a fairly complex
civilization. Their implements were not hand-craft products, but showed
machine workmanship. There were two objects hanging on hooks on the
kitchen wall which he was sure were weapons. Both had wooden
shoulder-stocks, and wooden fore-pieces; they had long tubes extending
to the front, and triggers like blasters. One had double tubes mounted
side-by-side, and double triggers; the other had an octagonal tube
mounted over a round tube, and a loop extension on the trigger-guard.
Then, there was a box on the kitchen wall, with a mouthpiece and a
cylindrical tube on a cord. Sometimes a bell would ring out of the box,
and the woman would go to this instrument, take down the tube and hold
it to her ear, and talk into the mouthpiece. There was another box from
which voices would issue, of people conversing, or of orators, or of
singing, and sometimes instrumental music. None of these were objects
made by savages; these people probably traded with some fairly high
civilization. They were not illiterate; he found printed matter,
indicating the use of some phonetic alphabet, and paper pamphlets
containing printed reproductions of photographs as well as verbal text.

There was also a vehicle on the farm, powered, like the one he had seen
on the road, by an engine in which a hydrocarbon liquid-fuel was
exploded. He made it his business to examine this minutely, and to study
its construction and operation until he was thoroughly familiar with it.

It was not until the third day after his arrival that the chickens began
to die. In the morning, Hradzka found three of them dead when he went to
feed them, the rest drooping unhealthily; he summoned the man and showed
him what he had found. The next morning, they were all dead, and the cow
was sick. She gave bloody milk, that evening, and the next morning she
lay in her stall and would not get up.

The man and the woman were also beginning to sicken, though both of them
tried to continue their work. It was the woman who first noticed that
the plants around the farmhouse were withering and turning yellow.

       *       *       *       *       *

The farmer went to the stable with Hradzka and looked at the cow.
Shaking his head, he limped back to the house, and returned carrying one
of the weapons from the kitchen--the one with the single trigger and the
octagonal tube. As he entered the stable, he jerked down and up on the
loop extension of the trigger-guard, then put the weapon to his shoulder
and pointed it at the cow. It made a flash, and roared louder even than
a hand-blaster, and the cow jerked convulsively and was dead. The man
then indicated by signs that Hradzka was to drag the dead cow out of the
stable, dig a hole, and bury it. This Hradzka did, carefully examining
the wound in the cow's head--the weapon, he decided, was not an
energy-weapon, but a simple solid-missile projector.

By evening, neither the man nor the woman were able to eat,
and both seemed to be suffering intensely. The man used the
communicating-instrument on the wall, probably calling on his friends
for help. Hradzka did what he could to make them comfortable, cooked his
own meal, washed the dishes as he had seen the woman doing, and tidied
up the kitchen.

It was not long before people, men and women whom he had seen on the
road or who had stopped at the farmhouse while he had been there, began
arriving, some carrying baskets of food; and shortly after Hradzka had
eaten, a vehicle like the farmer's, but in better condition and of
better quality, arrived and a young man got out of it and entered the
house, carrying a leather bag. He was apparently some sort of a
scientist; he examined the man and his wife, asked many questions, and
administered drugs. He also took samples for blood-tests and urinalysis.
This, Hradzka considered, was another of the many contradictions he had
encountered among these people--this man behaved like an educated
scientist, and seemingly had nothing in common with the peasant
herb-gatherer on the mountainside.

The fact was that Hradzka was worried. The strange death of the animals,
the blight which had smitten the trees and vegetables around the farm,
and the sickness of the farmer and his woman, all mystified him. He did
not know of any disease which would affect plants and animals and
humans; he wondered if some poisonous gas might not be escaping from the
earth near the farmhouse. However, he had not, himself, been affected.
He also disliked the way in which the doctor and the neighbors seemed to
be talking about him. While he had come to a considerable revision of
his original opinion about the culture-level of these people, it was not
impossible that they might suspect him of having caused the whole thing
by witchcraft; at any moment, they might fall upon him and put him to
death. In any case, there was no longer any use in his staying here, and
it might be wise if he left at once.

Accordingly, he filled his pockets with food from the pantry and slipped
out of the farmhouse; before his absence was discovered he was well on
his way down the road.




3


That night, Hradzka slept under a bridge across a fairly wide stream;
the next morning, he followed the road until he came to a town. It was
not a large place; there were perhaps four or five hundred houses and
other buildings in it. Most of these were dwellings like the farmhouse
where he had been staying, but some were much larger, and seemed to be
places of business. One of these latter was a concrete structure with
wide doors at the front; inside, he could see men working on the
internal-combustion vehicles which seemed to be in almost universal use.
Hradzka decided to obtain employment here.

It would be best, he decided, to continue his pretense of being a
deaf-mute. He did not know whether a world-language were in use at this
time or not, and even if not, the pretense of being a foreigner unable
to speak the local dialect might be dangerous. So he entered the
vehicle-repair shop and accosted a man in a clean shirt who seemed to be
issuing instructions to the workers, going into his pantomime of the
homeless mute seeking employment.

The master of the repair-shop merely laughed at him, however. Hradzka
became more insistent in his manner, making signs to indicate his hunger
and willingness to work. The other men in the shop left their tasks and
gathered around; there was much laughter and unmistakably ribald and
derogatory remarks. Hradzka was beginning to give up hope of getting
employment here when one of the workmen approached the master and
whispered something to him.

The two of them walked away, conversing in low voices. Hradzka thought
he understood the situation; no doubt the workman, thinking to lighten
his own labor, was urging that the vagrant be employed, for no other pay
than food and lodging. At length, the master assented to his employee's
urgings; he returned, showed Hradzka a hose and a bucket and sponges and
cloths, and set him to work cleaning the mud from one of the vehicles.
Then, after seeing that the work was being done properly, he went away,
entering a room at one side of the shop.

About twenty minutes later, another man entered the shop. He was not
dressed like any of the other people whom Hradzka had seen; he wore a
gray tunic and breeches, polished black boots, and a cap with a visor
and a metal insignia on it; on a belt, he carried a holstered weapon
like a blaster.

After speaking to one of the workers, who pointed Hradzka out to him, he
approached the fugitive and said something. Hradzka made gestures at his
mouth and ears and made gargling sounds; the newcomer shrugged and
motioned him to come with him, at the same time producing a pair of
handcuffs from his belt and jingling them suggestively.

In a few seconds, Hradzka tried to analyze the situation and estimate
its possibilities. The newcomer was a soldier, or, more likely, a
policeman, since manacles were a part of his equipment. Evidently, since
the evening before, a warning had been made public by means of
communicating devices such as he had seen at the farm, advising people
that a man of his description, pretending to be a deaf-mute, should be
detained and the police notified; it had been for that reason that the
workman had persuaded his master to employ Hradzka. No doubt he would be
accused of causing the conditions at the farm by sorcery.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hradzka shrugged and nodded, then went to the water-tap to turn off the
hose he had been using. He disconnected it, coiled it and hung it up,
and then picked up the water-bucket. Then, without warning, he hurled
the water into the policeman's face, sprang forward, swinging the bucket
by the bale, and hit the man on the head. Releasing his grip on the
bucket, he tore the blaster or whatever it was from the holster.

One of the workers swung a hammer, as though to throw it. Hradzka aimed
the weapon at him and pulled the trigger; the thing belched fire and
kicked back painfully in his hand, and the man fell. He used it again to
drop the policeman, then thrust it into the waistband of his trousers
and ran outside. The thing was not a blaster at all, he realized--only a
missile-projector like the big weapons at the farm, utilizing the force
of some chemical explosive.

The policeman's vehicle was standing outside. It was a small,
single-seat, two wheeled affair. Having become familiar with the
principles of these hydro-carbon engines from examination of the vehicle
of the farm, and accustomed as he was to far more complex mechanisms
than this crude affair, Hradzka could see at a glance how to operate it.
Springing onto the saddle, he kicked away the folding support and
started the engine. Just as he did, the master of the repair-shop ran
outside, one of the small hand-weapons in his hand, and fired several
shots. They all missed, but Hradzka heard the whining sound of the
missiles passing uncomfortably close to him.

It was imperative that he recover the blaster he had hidden in the
hollow tree at the head of the valley. By this time, there would be a
concerted search under way for him, and he needed a better weapon than
the solid-missile projector he had taken from the policeman. He did not
know how many shots the thing contained, but if it propelled solid
missiles by chemical explosion, there could not have been more than five
or six such charges in the cylindrical part of the weapon which he had
assumed to be the charge-holder. On the other hand, his blaster, a
weapon of much greater power, contained enough energy for five hundred
blasts, and with it were eight extra energy-capsules, giving him a total
of four thousand five hundred blasts.

Handling the two-wheeled vehicle was no particular problem; although he
had never ridden on anything of the sort before, it was child's play
compared to controlling a Hundredth Century strato-rocket, and Hradzka
was a skilled rocket-pilot.

Several times he passed vehicles on the road--the passenger vehicles
with enclosed cabins, and cargo-vehicles piled high with farm produce.
Once he encountered a large number of children, gathered in front of a
big red building with a flagstaff in front, from which a queer flag,
with horizontal red and white stripes and a white-spotted blue device in
the corner, flew. They scattered off the road in terror at his approach;
fortunately, he hit none of them, for at the speed at which he was
traveling, such a collision would have wrecked his light vehicle.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he approached the farm where he had spent the past few days, he saw
two passenger-vehicles standing by the road. One was a black one,
similar to the one in which the physician had come to the farm, and the
other was white with black trimmings and bore the same device he had
seen on the cap of the policeman. A policeman was sitting in the
driver's seat of this vehicle, and another policeman was standing beside
it, breathing smoke with one of the white paper cylinders these people
used. In the farm-yard, two men were going about with a square black
box; to this box, a tube was connected by a wire, and they were passing
the tube about over the ground.

The policeman who was standing beside the vehicle saw him approach, and
blew his whistle, then drew the weapon from his belt. Hradzka, who had
been expecting some attempt to halt him, had let go the right-hand
steering handle and drawn his own weapon; as the policeman drew, he
fired at him. Without observing the effect of the shot, he sped on;
before he had rounded the bend above the farm, several shots were fired
after him.

A mile beyond, he came to the place where he had hidden the blaster. He
stopped the vehicle and jumped off, plunging into the brush and racing
toward the hollow tree. Just as he reached it, he heard a vehicle
approach and stop, and the door of the police vehicle slam. Hradzka's
fingers found the belt of his blaster; he dragged it out and buckled it
on, tossing away the missile weapon he had been carrying.

Then, crouching behind the tree, he waited. A few moments later, he
caught a movement in the brush toward the road. He brought up the
blaster, aimed and squeezed the trigger. There was a faint bluish glow
at the muzzle, and a blast of energy tore through the brush, smashing
the molecular structure of everything that stood in the way. There was
an involuntary shout of alarm from the direction of the road; at least
one of the policemen had escaped the blast. Hradzka holstered his weapon
and crept away for some distance, keeping under cover, then turned and
waited for some sign of the presence of his enemies. For some time
nothing happened; he decided to turn hunter against the men who were
hunting him. He started back in the direction of the road, making a wide
circle, flitting silently from rock to bush and from bush to tree,
stopping often to look and listen.

This finally brought him upon one of the policemen, and almost
terminated his flight at the same time. He must have grown
over-confident and careless; suddenly a weapon roared, and a missile
smashed through the brush inches from his face. The shot had come from
his left and a little to the rear. Whirling, he blasted four times, in
rapid succession, then turned and fled for a few yards, dropping and
crawling behind a rock. When he looked back, he could see wisps of smoke
rising from the shattered trees and bushes which had absorbed the
energy-output of his weapon, and he caught a faint odor of burned flesh.
One of his pursuers, at least, would pursue him no longer.

He slipped away, down into the tangle of ravines and hollows in which he
had wandered the day before his arrival at the farm. For the time being,
he felt safe, and finally confident that he was not being pursued, he
stopped to rest. The place where he stopped seemed familiar, and he
looked about. In a moment, he recognized the little stream, the pool
where he had bathed his feet, the clump of seedling pines under which he
had slept. He even found the silver-foil wrapping from the food
concentrate capsule.

But there had been a change, since the night when he had slept here.
Then the young pines had been green and alive; now they were blighted,
and their needles had turned brown. Hradzka stood for a long time,
looking at them. It was the same blight that had touched the plants
around the farmhouse. And here, among the pine needles on the ground,
lay a dead bird.

It took some time for him to admit, to himself, the implications of
vegetation, the chickens, the cow, the farmer and his wife, had all
sickened and died. He had been in this place, and now, when he had
returned, he found that death had followed him here, too.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the early centuries of the Atomic Era, he knew, there had been
great wars, the stories of which had survived even to the Hundredth
Century. Among the weapons that had been used, there had been artificial
plagues and epidemics, caused by new types of bacteria developed in
laboratories, against which the victims had possessed no protection.
Those germs and viruses had persisted for centuries, and gradually had
lost their power to harm mankind. Suppose, now, that he had brought some
of them back with him, to a century before they had been developed.
Suppose, that was, that he were a human plague-carrier. He thought of
the vermin that had infested the clothing he had taken from the man he
had killed on the other side of the mountain; they had not troubled him
after the first day.

There was a throbbing mechanical sound somewhere in the air; he looked
about, and finally identified its source. A small aircraft had come over
the valley from the other side of the mountain and was circling lazily
overhead. He froze, shrinking back under a pine-tree; as long as he
remained motionless, he would not be seen, and soon the thing would go
away. He was beginning to understand why the search for him was being
pressed so relentlessly; as long as he remained alive, he was a menace
to everybody in this First Century world.

He got out his supply of food concentrates, saw that he had only three
capsules left, and put them away again. For a long time, he sat under
the dying tree, chewing on a twig and thinking. There must be some way
in which he could overcome, or even utilize, his inherent deadliness to
these people. He might find some isolated community, conceal himself
near it, invade it at night and infect it, and then, when everybody was
dead, move in and take it for himself. But was there any such isolated
community? The farmhouse where he had worked had been fairly remote, yet
its inhabitants had been in communication with the outside world, and
the physician had come immediately in response to their call for help.

The little aircraft had been circling overhead, directly above the place
where he lay hidden. For a while, Hradzka was afraid it had spotted him,
and was debating the advisability of using his blaster on it. Then it
banked, turned and went away. He watched it circle over the valley on
the other side of the mountain, and got to his feet.




4


Almost at once, there was a new sound--a multiple throbbing, at a quick,
snarling tempo that hinted at enormous power, growing louder each
second. Hradzka stiffened and drew his blaster; as he did, five more
aircraft swooped over the crest of the mountain and came rushing down
toward him; not aimlessly, but as though they knew exactly where he was.
As they approached, the leading edges of their wings sparkled with
light, branches began flying from the trees about him, and there was a
loud hammering noise.

He aimed a little in front of them and began blasting. A wing flew from
one of the aircraft, and it plunged downward. Another came apart in the
air; a third burst into flames. The other two zoomed upward quickly.
Hradzka swung his blaster after them, blasting again and again. He hit a
fourth with a blast of energy, knocking it to pieces, and then the fifth
was out of range. He blasted at it twice, but without effect; a
hand-blaster was only good for a thousand yards at the most.

Holstering his weapon, he hurried away, following the stream and keeping
under cover of trees. The last of the attacking aircraft had gone away,
but the little scout-plane was still circling about, well out of
blaster-range.

Once or twice, Hradzka was compelled to stay hidden for some time, not
knowing the nature of the pilot's ability to detect him. It was during
one of these waits that the next phase of the attack developed.

It began, like the last one, with a distant roar that swelled in volume
until it seemed to fill the whole world. Then, fifteen or twenty
thousand feet out of blaster-range, the new attackers swept into sight.

There must have been fifty of them, huge tapering things with
wide-spread wings, flying in close formation, wave after V-shaped wave.
He stood and stared at them, amazed; he had never imagined that such
aircraft existed in the First Century. Then a high-pitched screaming
sound cut through the roar of the propellers, and for an instant he saw
countless small specks in the sky, falling downward.

The first bomb-salvo landed in the young pines, where he had fought
against the first air attack. Great gouts of flame shot upward, and
smoke, and flying earth and debris. Hradzka turned and started to run.
Another salvo fell in front of him; he veered to the left and plunged on
through the undergrowth. Now the bombs were falling all about him,
deafening him with their thunder, shaking him with concussion. He
dodged, frightened, as the trunk of a tree came crashing down beside
him. Then something hit him across the back, knocking him flat. For a
moment, he lay stunned, then tried to rise. As he did, a searing light
filled his eyes and a wave of intolerable heat swept over him. Then
darkness...

       *       *       *       *       *

"No, Zarvas Pol," Kradzy Zago repeated. "Hradzka will not return; the
'time-machine' was sabotaged."

"So? By you?" the soldier asked.

The scientist nodded. "I knew the purpose for which he intended it.
Hradzka was not content with having enslaved a whole Solar System: he
hungered to bring tyranny and serfdom to all the past and all the future
as well; he wanted to be master not only of the present but of the
centuries that were and were to be, as well. I never took part in
politics, Zarvas Pol; I had no hand in this revolt. But I could not be
party to such a crime as Hradzka contemplated when it lay within my
power to prevent it."

"The machine will take him out of our space-time continuum, or back to a
time when this planet was a swirling cloud of flaming gas?" Zarvas Pol
asked.

Kradzy Zago shook his head. "No, the unit is not powerful enough for
that. It will only take him about ten thousand years into the past. But
then, when it stops, the machine will destroy itself. It may destroy
Hradzka with it or he may escape. But if he does, he will be left
stranded ten thousand years ago, when he can do us no harm.

"Actually, it did not operate as he imagined and there is an infinitely
small chance that he could have returned to our 'time', in any event.
But I wanted to insure against even so small a chance."

"We can't be sure of that," Zarvas Pol objected. "He may know more about
the machine than you think; enough more to build another like it. So you
must build me a machine and I'll take back a party of volunteers and
hunt him down."

"That would not be necessary, and you would only share his fate." Then,
apparently changing the subject, Kradzy Zago asked: "Tell me, Zarvas
Pol; have you never heard the legends of the Deadly Radiations?"

General Zarvas smiled. "Who has not? Every cadet at the Officers'
College dreams of re-discovering them, to use as a weapon, but nobody
ever has. We hear these tales of how, in the early days, atomic engines
and piles and fission-bombs emitted particles which were utterly deadly,
which would make anything with which they came in contact deadly, which
would bring a horrible death to any human being. But these are only
myths. All the ancient experiments have been duplicated time and again,
and the deadly radiation effect has never been observed. Some say that
it is a mere old-wives' terror tale; some say that the deaths were
caused by fear of atomic energy, when it was still unfamiliar; others
contend that the fundamental nature of atomic energy has altered by the
degeneration of the fissionable matter. For my own part, I'm not enough
of a scientist to have an opinion."

       *       *       *       *       *

The old one smiled wanly. "None of these theories are correct. In the
beginning of the Atomic Era, the Deadly Radiations existed. They still
exist, but they are no longer deadly, because all life on this planet
has adapted itself to such radiations, and all living things are now
immune to them."

"And Hradzka has returned to a time when such immunity did not exist?
But would that not be to his advantage?"

"Remember, General, that man has been using atomic energy for ten
thousand years. Our whole world has become drenched with radioactivity.
The planet, the seas, the atmosphere, and every living thing, are all
radioactive, now. Radioactivity is as natural to us as the air we
breathe. Now, you remember hearing of the great wars of the first
centuries of the Atomic Era, in which whole nations were wiped out,
leaving only hundreds of survivors out of millions. You, no doubt, think
that such tales are products of ignorant and barbaric imagination, but I
assure you, they are literally true. It was not the blast-effect of a
few bombs which created such holocausts, but the radiations released by
the bombs. And those who survived to carry on the race were men and
women whose systems resisted the radiations, and they transmitted to
their progeny that power of resistance. In many cases, their children
were mutants--not monsters, although there were many of them, too, which
did not survive--but humans who were immune to radioactivity."

"An interesting theory, Kradzy Zago," the soldier commented. "And one
which conforms both to what we know of atomic energy and to the ancient
legends. Then you would say that those radiations are still deadly--to
the non-immune?"

"Exactly. And Hradzka, his body emitting those radiations, has returned
to the First Century of the Atomic Era--to a world without immunity."

General Zarvas' smile vanished. "Man!" he cried in horror. "You have
loosed a carrier of death among those innocent people of the past!"

Kradzy Zago nodded. "That is true. I estimate that Hradzka will probably
cause the death of a hundred or so people, before he is dealt with. But
dealt with he will be. Tell me, General; if a man should appear now, out
of nowhere, spreading a strange and horrible plague wherever he went,
what would you do?"

"Why, I'd hunt him down and kill him," General Zarvas replied. "Not for
anything he did, but for the menace he was. And then, I'd cover his body
with a mass of concrete bigger than this palace."

"Precisely." Kradzy Zago smiled. "And the military commanders and
political leaders of the First Century were no less ruthless or
efficient than you. You know how atomic energy was first used? There was
an ancient nation, upon the ruins of whose cities we have built our own,
which was famed for its idealistic humanitarianism. Yet that nation,
treacherously attacked, created the first atomic bombs in self defense,
and used them. It is among the people of that nation that Hradzka has
emerged."

"But would they recognize him as the cause of the calamity he brings
among them?"

"Of course. He will emerge at the time when atomic energy is first being
used. They will have detectors for the Deadly Radiations--detectors we
know nothing of, today, for a detection instrument must be free from the
thing it is intended to detect, and today everything is radioactive. It
will be a day or so before they discover what is happening to them, and
not a few will die in that time, I fear; but once they have found out
what is killing their people, Hradzka's days--no, his hours--will be
numbered."

"A mass of concrete bigger than this place," Tobbh the Slave repeated
General Zarvas' words. "_The Ancient Spaceport!_"

Prince Burvanny clapped him on the shoulder. "Tobbh, man! You've hit
it!"

"You mean...?" Kradzy Zago began.

"Yes. You all know of it. It's stood for nobody knows how many
millennia, and nobody's ever decided what it was, to begin with, except
that somebody, once, filled a valley with concrete, level from
mountain-top to mountain-top. The accepted theory is that it was done
for a firing-stand for the first Moon-rocket. But gentlemen, our friend
Tobbh's explained it. It is the tomb of Hradzka, and it has been the
tomb of Hradzka for ten thousand years before Hradzka was born!"

_BOOKEND_


Colonel Ashley Hampton chewed his cigar and forced himself to relax, his
glance slowly traversing the room, lingering on the mosaic of
book-spines in the tall cases, the sunlight splashed on the faded pastel
colors of the carpet, the soft-tinted autumn landscape outside the
French windows, the trophies of Indian and Filipino and German weapons
on the walls. He could easily feign relaxation here in the library of
"Greyrock," as long as he looked only at these familiar inanimate
things and avoided the five people gathered in the room with him, for
all of them were enemies.

There was his nephew, Stephen Hampton, greying at the temples but
youthfully dressed in sports-clothes, leaning with obvious if slightly
premature proprietorship against the fireplace, a whiskey-and-soda in
his hand. There was Myra, Stephen's smart, sophisticated-looking blonde
wife, reclining in a chair beside the desk. For these two, he felt an
implacable hatred. The others were no less enemies, perhaps more
dangerous enemies, but they were only the tools of Stephen and Myra. For
instance, T. Barnwell Powell, prim and self-satisfied, sitting on the
edge of his chair and clutching the briefcase on his lap as though it
were a restless pet which might attempt to escape. He was an honest man,
as lawyers went; painfully ethical. No doubt he had convinced himself
that his clients were acting from the noblest and most disinterested
motives. And Doctor Alexis Vehrner, with his Vandyke beard and his
Viennese accent as phony as a Soviet-controlled election, who had
preempted the chair at Colonel Hampton's desk. That rankled the old
soldier, but Doctor Vehrner would want to assume the position which
would give him appearance of commanding the situation, and he probably
felt that Colonel Hampton was no longer the master of "Greyrock." The
fifth, a Neanderthal type in a white jacket, was Doctor Vehrner's
attendant and bodyguard; he could be ignored, like an enlisted man
unthinkingly obeying the orders of a superior.

"But you are not cooperating, Colonel Hampton," the psychiatrist
complained. "How can I help you if you do not cooperate?"

Colonel Hampton took the cigar from his mouth. His white mustache,
tinged a faint yellow by habitual smoking, twitched angrily.

"Oh; you call it helping me, do you?" he asked acidly.

"But why else am I here?" the doctor parried.

"You're here because my loving nephew and his charming wife can't wait
to see me buried in the family cemetery; they want to bury me alive in
that private Bedlam of yours," Colonel Hampton replied.

"See!" Myra Hampton turned to the psychiatrist. "We are _persecuting_
him! We are all _envious_ of him! We are _plotting against_ him!"

"Of course; this sullen and suspicious silence is a common paranoid
symptom; one often finds such symptoms in cases of senile dementia,"
Doctor Vehrner agreed.

Colonel Hampton snorted contemptuously. Senile dementia! Well, he must
have been senile and demented, to bring this pair of snakes into his
home, because he felt an obligation to his dead brother's memory. And
he'd willed "Greyrock," and his money, and everything, to Stephen. Only
Myra couldn't wait till he died; she'd Lady-Macbethed her husband into
this insanity accusation.

"... however, I must fully satisfy myself, before I can sign the
commitment," the psychiatrist was saying. "After all, the patient is a
man of advanced age. Seventy-eight, to be exact."

Seventy-eight; almost eighty. Colonel Hampton could hardly realize that
he had been around so long. He had been a little boy, playing soldiers.
He had been a young man, breaking the family tradition of Harvard and
wangling an appointment to West Point. He had been a new second lieutenant
at a little post in Wyoming, in the last dying flicker of the Indian Wars.
He had been a first lieutenant, trying to make soldiers of militiamen and
hoping for orders to Cuba before the Spaniards gave up. He had been the
hard-bitten captain of a hard-bitten company, fighting Moros in the
jungles of Mindanao. Then, through the early years of the Twentieth
Century, after his father's death, he had been that _rara avis_ in the
American service, a really wealthy professional officer. He had played
polo, and served a turn as military attache at the Paris embassy. He had
commanded a regiment in France in 1918, and in the post-war years, had
rounded out his service in command of a regiment of Negro cavalry, before
retiring to "Greyrock." Too old for active service, or even a desk at the
Pentagon, he had drilled a Home Guard company of 4-Fs and boys and paunchy
middle-agers through the Second World War. Then he had been an old man,
sitting alone in the sunlight ... until a wonderful thing had happened.

"Get him to tell you about this invisible playmate of his," Stephen
suggested. "If that won't satisfy you, I don't know what will."

       *       *       *       *       *

It had begun a year ago last June. He had been sitting on a bench on the
east lawn, watching a kitten playing with a crumpled bit of paper on the
walk, circling warily around it as though it were some living prey,
stalking cautiously, pouncing and striking the paper ball with a paw and
then pursuing it madly. The kitten, whose name was Smokeball, was a
friend of his; soon she would tire of her game and jump up beside him to
be petted.

Then suddenly, he seemed to hear a girl's voice beside him:

"Oh, what a darling little cat! What's its name?"

"Smokeball," he said, without thinking. "She's about the color of a
shrapnel-burst...." Then he stopped short, looking about. There was
nobody in sight, and he realized that the voice had been inside his head
rather than in his ear.

"What the devil?" he asked himself. "Am I going nuts?"

There was a happy little laugh inside of him, like bubbles rising in a
glass of champagne.

"Oh, no; I'm really here," the voice, inaudible but mentally present,
assured him. "You can't see me, or touch me, or even really hear me, but
I'm not something you just imagined. I'm just as real as ... as
Smokeball, there. Only I'm a different kind of reality. Watch."

The voice stopped, and something that had seemed to be close to him left
him. Immediately, the kitten stopped playing with the crumpled paper and
cocked her head to one side, staring fixedly as at something above her.
He'd seen cats do that before--stare wide-eyed and entranced, as though
at something wonderful which was hidden from human eyes. Then, still
looking up and to the side, Smokeball trotted over and jumped onto his
lap, but even as he stroked her, she was looking at an invisible
something beside him. At the same time, he had a warm and pleasant
feeling, as of a happy and affectionate presence near him.

"No," he said, slowly and judicially. "That's not just my imagination.
But who--or what--are you?"

"I'm.... Oh, I don't know how to think it so that you'll understand."
The voice inside his head seemed baffled, like a physicist trying to
explain atomic energy to a Hottentot. "I'm not material. If you can
imagine a mind that doesn't need a brain to think with.... Oh, I can't
explain it now! But when I'm talking to you, like this, I'm really
thinking inside your brain, along with your own mind, and you hear the
words without there being any sound. And you just don't know any words
that would express it."

He had never thought much, one way or another, about spiritualism. There
had been old people, when he had been a boy, who had told stories of
ghosts and apparitions, with the firmest conviction that they were true.
And there had been an Irishman, in his old company in the Philippines,
who swore that the ghost of a dead comrade walked post with him when he
was on guard.

"Are you a spirit?" he asked. "I mean, somebody who once lived in a
body, like me?"

"N-no." The voice inside him seemed doubtful. "That is, I don't think
so. I know about spirits; they're all around, everywhere. But I don't
think I'm one. At least, I've always been like I am now, as long as I
can remember. Most spirits don't seem to sense me. I can't reach most
living people, either; their minds are closed to me, or they have such
disgusting minds I can't bear to touch them. Children are open to me,
but when they tell their parents about me, they are laughed at, or
punished for lying, and then they close up against me. You're the first
grown-up person I've been able to reach for a long time."

"Probably getting into my second childhood," Colonel Hampton grunted.

"Oh, but you mustn't be ashamed of that!" the invisible entity told him.
"That's the beginning of real wisdom--becoming childlike again. One of
your religious teachers said something like that, long ago, and a long
time before that, there was a Chinaman whom people called Venerable
Child, because his wisdom had turned back again to a child's
simplicity."

"That was Lao Tze," Colonel Hampton said, a little surprised. "Don't
tell me you've been around that long."

"Oh, but I have! Longer than that; oh, for very long." And yet the voice
he seemed to be hearing was the voice of a young girl. "You don't mind
my coming to talk to you?" it continued. "I get so lonely, so dreadfully
lonely, you see."

"Urmh! So do I," Colonel Hampton admitted. "I'm probably going bats, but
what the hell? It's a nice way to go bats, I'll say that.... Stick
around; whoever you are, and let's get acquainted. I sort of like you."

A feeling of warmth suffused him, as though he had been hugged by
someone young and happy and loving.

"Oh, I'm glad. I like you, too; you're nice!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yes, of course." Doctor Vehrner nodded sagely. "That is a schizoid
tendency; the flight from reality into a dream-world peopled by
creatures of the imagination. You understand, there is usually a mixture
of psychotic conditions, in cases like this. We will say that this case
begins with simple senile dementia--physical brain degeneration, a
result of advanced age. Then the paranoid symptoms appear; he imagines
himself surrounded by envious enemies, who are conspiring against him.
The patient then withdraws into himself, and in his self-imposed
isolation, he conjures up imaginary companionship. I have no doubt...."

In the beginning, he had suspected that this unseen visitor was no more
than a figment of his own lonely imagination, but as the days passed,
this suspicion vanished. Whatever this entity might be, an entity it
was, entirely distinct from his own conscious or subconscious mind.

At first she--he had early come to think of the being as feminine--had
seemed timid, fearful lest her intrusions into his mind prove a
nuisance. It took some time for him to assure her that she was always
welcome. With time, too, his impression of her grew stronger and more
concrete. He found that he was able to visualize her, as he might
visualize something remembered, or conceived of in imagination--a lovely
young girl, slender and clothed in something loose and filmy, with
flowers in her honey-colored hair, and clear blue eyes, a pert, cheerful
face, a wide, smiling mouth and an impudently up-tilted nose. He
realized that this image was merely a sort of allegorical
representation, his own private object-abstraction from a reality which
his senses could never picture as it existed.

It was about this time that he had begun to call her Dearest. She had
given him no name, and seemed quite satisfied with that one.

"I've been thinking," she said, "I ought to have a name for you, too. Do
you mind if I call you Popsy?"

"Huh?" He had been really startled at that. If he needed any further
proof of Dearest's independent existence, that was it. Never, in the
uttermost depths of his subconscious, would he have been likely to label
himself Popsy. "Know what they used to call me in the Army?" he asked.
"Slaughterhouse Hampton. They claimed I needed a truckload of sawdust to
follow me around and cover up the blood." He chuckled. "Nobody but you
would think of calling me Popsy."

There was a price, he found, that he must pay for Dearest's
companionship--the price of eternal vigilance. He found that he was
acquiring the habit of opening doors and then needlessly standing aside
to allow her to precede him. And, although she insisted that he need not
speak aloud to her, that she could understand any thought which he
directed to her, he could not help actually pronouncing the words, if
only in a faint whisper. He was glad that he had learned, before the end
of his plebe year at West Point, to speak without moving his lips.

Besides himself and the kitten, Smokeball, there was one other at
"Greyrock" who was aware, if only faintly, of Dearest's presence. That
was old Sergeant Williamson, the Colonel's Negro servant, a retired
first sergeant from the regiment he had last commanded. With increasing
frequency, he would notice the old Negro pause in his work, as though
trying to identify something too subtle for his senses, and then shake
his head in bewilderment.

One afternoon in early October--just about a year ago--he had been
reclining in a chair on the west veranda, smoking a cigar and trying to
re-create, for his companion, a mental picture of an Indian camp as he
had seen it in Wyoming in the middle '90's, when Sergeant Williamson
came out from the house, carrying a pair of the Colonel's field-boots
and a polishing-kit. Unaware of the Colonel's presence, he set down his
burden, squatted on the floor and began polishing the boots, humming
softly to himself. Then he must have caught a whiff of the Colonel's
cigar. Raising his head, he saw the Colonel, and made as though to pick
up the boots and polishing equipment.

"Oh, that's all right, Sergeant," the Colonel told him. "Carry on with
what you're doing. There's room enough for both of us here."

"Yessuh; thank yo', suh." The old ex-sergeant resumed his soft humming,
keeping time with the brush in his hand.

"You know, Popsy, I think he knows I'm here," Dearest said. "Nothing
definite, of course; he just feels there's something here that he can't
see."

"I wonder. I've noticed something like that. Funny, he doesn't seem to
mind, either. Colored people are usually scary about ghosts and spirits
and the like.... I'm going to ask him." He raised his voice. "Sergeant,
do you seem to notice anything peculiar around here, lately?"

The repetitious little two-tone melody broke off short. The
soldier-servant lifted his face and looked into the Colonel's. His brow
wrinkled, as though he were trying to express a thought for which he had
no words.

"Yo' notice dat, too, suh?" he asked. "Why, yessuh, Cunnel; Ah don' know
'zackly how t' say hit, but dey is som'n, at dat. Hit seems like ...
like a kinda ... a kinda _blessedness_." He chuckled. "Dat's hit,
Cunnel; dey's a blessedness. Wondeh iffen Ah's gittin' r'ligion, now?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, all this is very interesting, I'm sure, Doctor," T. Barnwell
Powell was saying, polishing his glasses on a piece of tissue and
keeping one elbow on his briefcase at the same time. "But really, it's
not getting us anywhere, so to say. You know, we must have that
commitment signed by you. Now, is it or is it not your opinion that this
man is of unsound mind?"

"Now, have patience, Mr. Powell," the psychiatrist soothed him. "You
must admit that as long as this gentleman refuses to talk, I cannot be
said to have interviewed him."

"What if he won't talk?" Stephen Hampton burst out. "We've told you
about his behavior; how he sits for hours mumbling to this imaginary
person he thinks is with him, and how he always steps aside when he
opens a door, to let somebody who isn't there go through ahead of him,
and how.... Oh, hell, what's the use? If he were in his right mind, he'd
speak up and try to prove it, wouldn't he? What do you say, Myra?"

Myra was silent, and Colonel Hampton found himself watching her with
interest. Her mouth had twisted into a wry grimace, and she was
clutching the arms of her chair until her knuckles whitened. She seemed
to be in some intense pain. Colonel Hampton hoped she were; preferably
with something slightly fatal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sergeant Williamson's suspicion that he might be getting religion became
a reality, for a time, that winter, after The Miracle.

It had been a blustery day in mid-January, with a high wind driving
swirls of snow across the fields, and Colonel Hampton, fretting indoors
for several days, decided to go out and fill his lungs with fresh air.
Bundled warmly, swinging his blackthorn cane, he had set out,
accompanied by Dearest, to tramp cross-country to the village, three
miles from "Greyrock." They had enjoyed the walk through the white
wind-swept desolation, the old man and his invisible companion, until
the accident had happened.

A sheet of glassy ice had lain treacherously hidden under a skift of
snow; when he stepped upon it, his feet shot from under him, the stick
flew from his hand, and he went down. When he tried to rise, he found
that he could not. Dearest had been almost frantic.

"Oh, Popsy, you must get up!" she cried. "You'll freeze if you don't.
Come on, Popsy; try again!"

He tried, in vain. His old body would not obey his will.

"It's no use, Dearest; I can't. Maybe it's just as well," he said.
"Freezing's an easy death, and you say people live on as spirits, after
they die. Maybe we can always be together, now."

"I don't know. I don't want you to die yet, Popsy. I never was able to
get through to a spirit, and I'm afraid.... Wait! Can you crawl a
little? Enough to get over under those young pines?"

"I think so." His left leg was numb, and he believed that it was broken.
"I can try."

He managed to roll onto his back, with his head toward the clump of pine
seedlings. Using both hands and his right heel, he was able to propel
himself slowly through the snow until he was out of the worst of the
wind.

"That's good; now try to cover yourself," Dearest advised. "Put your
hands in your coat pockets. And wait here; I'll try to get help."

Then she left him. For what seemed a long time, he lay motionless in the
scant protection of the young pines, suffering miserably. He began to
grow drowsy. As soon as he realized what was happening, he was
frightened, and the fright pulled him awake again. Soon he felt himself
drowsing again. By shifting his position, he caused a jab of pain from
his broken leg, which brought him back to wakefulness. Then the deadly
drowsiness returned.

       *       *       *       *       *

This time, he was wakened by a sharp voice, mingled with a throbbing
sound that seemed part of a dream of the cannonading in the Argonne.

"Dah! Look-a dah!" It was, he realized, Sergeant Williamson's voice.
"Gittin' soft in de haid, is Ah, yo' ol' wuthless no-'count?"

He turned his face, to see the battered jeep from "Greyrock," driven by
Arthur, the stableman and gardener, with Sergeant Williamson beside him.
The older Negro jumped to the ground and ran toward him. At the same
time, he felt Dearest with him again.

"We made it, Popsy! We made it!" she was exulting. "I was afraid I'd
never make him understand, but I did. And you should have seen him bully
that other man into driving the jeep. Are you all right, Popsy?"

"Is yo' all right, Cunnel?" Sergeant Williamson was asking.

"My leg's broken, I think, but outside of that I'm all right," he
answered both of them. "How did you happen to find me, Sergeant?"

The old Negro soldier rolled his eyes upward. "Cunnel, hit war a mi'acle
of de blessed Lawd!" he replied, solemnly. "An angel of de Lawd done
appeahed unto me." He shook his head slowly. "Ah's a sinful man, Cunnel;
Ah couldn't see de angel face to face, but de glory of de angel was
befoh me, an' guided me."

They used his cane and a broken-off bough to splint the leg; they
wrapped him in a horse-blanket and hauled him back to "Greyrock" and put
him to bed, with Dearest clinging solicitously to him. The fractured leg
knit slowly, though the physician was amazed at the speed with which,
considering his age, he made recovery, and with his unfailing
cheerfulness. He did not know, of course, that he was being assisted by
an invisible nurse. For all that, however, the leaves on the oaks around
"Greyrock" were green again before Colonel Hampton could leave his bed
and hobble about the house on a cane.

Arthur, the young Negro who had driven the jeep, had become one of the
most solid pillars of the little A.M.E. church beyond the village, as a
result. Sergeant Williamson had also become an attendant at church for a
while, and then stopped. Without being able to define, or spell, or even
pronounce the term, Sergeant Williamson was a strict pragmatist. Most
Africans are, even five generations removed from the slave-ship that
brought their forefathers from the Dark Continent. And Sergeant
Williamson could not find the blessedness at the church. Instead, it
seemed to center about the room where his employer and former regiment
commander lay. That, to his mind, was quite reasonable. If an Angel of
the Lord was going to tarry upon earth, the celestial being would
naturally prefer the society of a retired U.S.A. colonel to that of a
passel of triflin', no-'counts at an ol' clapboard church house. Be that
as it may, he could always find the blessedness in Colonel Hampton's
room, and sometimes, when the Colonel would be asleep, the blessedness
would follow him out and linger with him for a while.

       *       *       *       *       *

Colonel Hampton wondered, anxiously, where Dearest was, now. He had not
felt her presence since his nephew had brought his lawyer and the
psychiatrist into the house. He wondered if she had voluntarily
separated herself from him for fear he might give her some sign of
recognition that these harpies would fasten upon as an evidence of
unsound mind. He could not believe that she had deserted him entirely,
now when he needed her most....

"Well, what can I do?" Doctor Vehrner was complaining. "You bring me
here to interview him, and he just sits there and does nothing.... Will
you consent to my giving him an injection of sodium pentathol?"

"Well, I don't know, now," T. Barnwell Powell objected. "I've heard of
that drug--one of the so-called 'truth-serum' drugs. I doubt if
testimony taken under its influence would be admissible in a court...."

"This is not a court, Mr. Powell," the doctor explained patiently. "And
I am not taking testimony; I am making a diagnosis. Pentathol is a
recognized diagnostic agent."

"Go ahead," Stephen Hampton said. "Anything to get this over with....
You agree, Myra?"

Myra said nothing. She simply sat, with staring eyes, and clutched the
arms of her chair as though to keep from slipping into some dreadful
abyss. Once a low moan escaped from her lips.

"My wife is naturally overwrought by this painful business," Stephen
said. "I trust that you gentlemen will excuse her.... Hadn't you better
go and lie down somewhere, Myra?"

She shook her head violently, moaning again. Both the doctor and the
attorney were looking at her curiously.

"Well, I object to being drugged," Colonel Hampton said, rising. "And
what's more, I won't submit to it."

"Albert!" Doctor Vehrner said sharply, nodding toward the Colonel. The
pithecanthropoid attendant in the white jacket hastened forward, pinned
his arms behind him and dragged him down into the chair. For an instant,
the old man tried to resist, then, realizing the futility and undignity
of struggling, subsided. The psychiatrist had taken a leather case from
his pocket and was selecting a hypodermic needle.

Then Myra Hampton leaped to her feet, her face working hideously.

"No! Stop! Stop!" she cried.

Everybody looked at her in surprise, Colonel Hampton no less than the
others. Stephen Hampton called out her name sharply.

"No! You shan't do this to me! You shan't! You're torturing me! you are
all devils!" she screamed. "Devils! _Devils!_"

"Myra!" her husband barked, stepping forward.

With a twist, she eluded him, dashing around the desk and pulling open a
drawer.

For an instant, she fumbled inside it, and when she brought her hand up,
she had Colonel Hampton's .45 automatic in it. She drew back the slide
and released it, loading the chamber.

Doctor Vehrner, the hypodermic in his hand, turned. Stephen Hampton
sprang at her, dropping his drink. And Albert, the prognathous
attendant, released Colonel Hampton and leaped at the woman with the
pistol, with the unthinking promptness of a dog whose master is in
danger.

Stephen Hampton was the closest to her; she shot him first, point-blank
in the chest. The heavy bullet knocked him backward against a small
table; he and it fell over together. While he was falling, the woman
turned, dipped the muzzle of her pistol slightly and fired again; Doctor
Vehrner's leg gave way under him and he went down, the hypodermic flying
from his hand and landing at Colonel Hampton's feet. At the same time,
the attendant, Albert, was almost upon her. Quickly, she reversed the
heavy Colt, pressed the muzzle against her heart, and fired a third
shot.

T. Barnwell Powell had let the briefcase slip to the floor; he was
staring, slack-jawed, at the tableau of violence which had been enacted
before him. The attendant, having reached Myra, was looking down at her
stupidly. Then he stooped, and straightened.

"She's dead!" he said, unbelievingly.

Colonel Hampton rose, putting his heel on the hypodermic and crushing
it.

"Of course she's dead!" he barked. "You have any first-aid training?
Then look after these other people. Doctor Vehrner first; the other
man's unconscious; he'll wait."

"No; look after the other man first," Doctor Vehrner said.

Albert gaped back and forth between them.

"Goddammit, you heard me!" Colonel Hampton roared. It was Slaughterhouse
Hampton, whose service-ribbons started with the Indian campaigns,
speaking; an officer who never for an instant imagined that his orders
would not be obeyed. "Get a tourniquet on that man's leg, you!" He
moderated his voice and manner about half a degree and spoke to Vehrner.
"You are not the doctor, you're the patient, now. You'll do as you're
told. Don't you know that a man shot in the leg with a .45 can bleed to
death without half trying?"

"Yo'-all do like de Cunnel says, 'r foh Gawd, yo'-all gwine wish yo'
had," Sergeant Williamson said, entering the room. "Git a move on."

He stood just inside the doorway, holding a silver-banded malacca
walking-stick that he had taken from the hall-stand. He was grasping it
in his left hand, below the band, with the crook out, holding it at his
side as though it were a sword in a scabbard, which was exactly what
that walking-stick was. Albert looked at him, and then back at Colonel
Hampton. Then, whipping off his necktie, he went down on his knees
beside Doctor Vehrner, skillfully applying the improvised tourniquet,
twisting it tight with an eighteen-inch ruler the Colonel took from the
desk and handed to him.

"Go get the first-aid kit, Sergeant," the Colonel said. "And hurry. Mr.
Stephen's been shot, too."

"Yessuh!" Sergeant Williamson executed an automatic salute and
about-face and raced from the room. The Colonel picked up the telephone
on the desk.

The County Hospital was three miles from "Greyrock"; the State Police
substation a good five. He dialed the State Police number first.

"Sergeant Mallard? Colonel Hampton, at 'Greyrock.' We've had a little
trouble here. My nephew's wife just went _juramentado_ with one of my
pistols, shot and wounded her husband and another man, and then shot and
killed herself.... Yes, indeed it is, Sergeant. I wish you'd send
somebody over here, as soon as possible, to take charge.... Oh, you
will? That's good.... No, it's all over, and nobody to arrest; just the
formalities.... Well, thank you, Sergeant."

The old Negro cavalryman re-entered the room, without the sword-cane and
carrying a heavy leather box on a strap over his shoulder. He set this
on the floor and opened it, then knelt beside Stephen Hampton. The
Colonel was calling the hospital.

"... gunshot wounds," he was saying. "One man in the chest and the other
in the leg, both with a .45 pistol. And you'd better send a doctor who's
qualified to write a death certificate; there was a woman killed,
too.... Yes, certainly; the State Police have been notified."

"Dis ain' so bad, Cunnel," Sergeant Williamson raised his head to say.
"Ah's seen men shot wuss'n dis dat was ma'ked 'Duty' inside a month,
suh."

Colonel Hampton nodded. "Well, get him fixed up as best you can, till
the ambulance gets here. And there's whiskey and glasses on that table,
over there. Better give Doctor Vehrner a drink." He looked at T.
Barnwell Powell, still frozen to his chair, aghast at the carnage around
him. "And give Mr. Powell a drink, too. He needs one."

He did, indeed. Colonel Hampton could have used a drink, too; the
library looked like beef-day at an Indian agency. But he was still
Slaughterhouse Hampton, and consequently could not afford to exhibit
queasiness.

It was then, for the first time since the business had started that he
felt the presence of Dearest.

"Oh, Popsy, are you all right?" the voice inside his head was asking.
"It's all over, now; you won't have anything to worry about, any more.
But, oh, I was afraid I wouldn't be able to do it!"

"My God, Dearest!" He almost spoke aloud. "Did you make her do that?"

"Popsy!" The voice in his mind was grief-stricken. "You.... You're
afraid of me! Never be afraid of Dearest, Popsy! And don't hate me for
this. It was the only thing I could do. If he'd given you that
injection, he could have made you tell him all about us, and then he'd
have been sure you were crazy, and they'd have taken you away. And they
treat people dreadfully at that place of his. You'd have been driven
really crazy before long, and then your mind would have been closed to
me, so that I wouldn't have been able to get through to you, any more.
What I did was the only thing I could do."

"I don't hate you, Dearest," he replied, mentally. "And I don't blame
you. It was a little disconcerting, though, to discover the extent of
your capabilities.... How did you manage it?"

"You remember how I made the Sergeant see an angel, the time you were
down in the snow?" Colonel Hampton nodded. "Well, I made her see ...
things that weren't angels," Dearest continued. "After I'd driven her
almost to distraction, I was able to get into her mind and take control
of her." Colonel Hampton felt a shudder inside of him. "That was
horrible; that woman had a mind like a sewer; I still feel dirty from
it! But I made her get the pistol--I knew where you kept it--and I knew
how to use it, even if she didn't. Remember when we were shooting
muskrats, that time, along the river?"

"Uhuh. I wondered how she knew enough to unlock the action and load the
chamber." He turned and faced the others.

Doctor Vehrner was sitting on the floor, with his back to the chair
Colonel Hampton had occupied, his injured leg stretched out in front of
him. Albert was hovering over him with mother-hen solicitude. T.
Barnwell Powell was finishing his whiskey and recovering a fraction of
his normal poise.

"Well, I suppose you gentlemen see, now, who was really crazy around
here?" Colonel Hampton addressed them bitingly. "That woman has been
dangerously close to the borderline of sanity for as long as she's been
here. I think my precious nephew trumped up this ridiculous insanity
complaint against me as much to discredit any testimony I might ever
give about his wife's mental condition as because he wanted to get
control of my estate. I also suppose that the tension she was under
here, this afternoon, was too much for her, and the scheme boomeranged
on its originators. Curious case of poetic justice, but I'm sorry you
had to be included in it, Doctor."

"Attaboy, Popsy!" Dearest enthused. "Now you have them on the run; don't
give them a chance to re-form. You know what Patton always said--Grab
'em by the nose and kick 'em in the pants."

Colonel Hampton re-lighted his cigar. "Patton only said 'pants' when he
was talking for publication," he told her, _sotto voce_. Then he noticed
the unsigned commitment paper lying on the desk. He picked it up,
crumpled it, and threw it into the fire.

"I don't think you'll be needing that," he said. "You know, this isn't
the first time my loving nephew has expressed doubts as to my sanity."
He sat down in the chair at the desk, motioning to his servant to bring
him a drink. "And see to the other gentlemen's glasses, Sergeant," he
directed. "Back in 1929, Stephen thought I was crazy as a bedbug to sell
all my securities and take a paper loss, around the first of September.
After October 24th, I bought them back at about twenty per cent of what
I'd sold them for, after he'd lost his shirt." That, he knew, would have
an effect on T. Barnwell Powell. "And in December, 1944, I was just
plain nuts, selling all my munition shares and investing in a company
that manufactured baby-food. Stephen thought that Rundstedt's Ardennes
counter-offensive would put off the end of the war for another year and
a half!"

"Baby-food, eh?" Doctor Vehrner chuckled.

Colonel Hampton sipped his whiskey slowly, then puffed on his cigar.
"No, this pair were competent liars," he replied. "A good workmanlike
liar never makes up a story out of the whole cloth; he always takes a
fabric of truth and embroiders it to suit the situation." He smiled
grimly; that was an accurate description of his own tactical procedure
at the moment. "I hadn't intended this to come out, Doctor, but it
happens that I am a convinced believer in spiritualism. I suppose you'll
think that's a delusional belief, too?"

"Well...." Doctor Vehrner pursed his lips. "I reject the idea of
survival after death, myself, but I think that people who believe in
such a theory are merely misevaluating evidence. It is definitely not,
in itself, a symptom of a psychotic condition."

"Thank you, Doctor." The Colonel gestured with his cigar. "Now, I'll
admit their statements about my appearing to be in conversation with
some invisible or imaginary being. That's all quite true. I'm convinced
that I'm in direct-voice communication with the spirit of a young girl
who was killed by Indians in this section about a hundred and
seventy-five years ago. At first, she communicated by automatic writing;
later we established direct-voice communication. Well, naturally, a man
in my position would dislike the label of spirit-medium; there
are too many invidious associations connected with the term. But there
it is. I trust both of you gentlemen will remember the ethics of your
respective professions and keep this confidential."

"Oh, brother!" Dearest was fairly hugging him with delight. "When bigger
and better lies are told, we tell them, don't we, Popsy?"

"Yes, and try and prove otherwise," Colonel Hampton replied, around his
cigar. Then he blew a jet of smoke and spoke to the men in front of him.

"I intend paying for my nephew's hospitalization, and for his wife's
funeral," he said. "And then, I'm going to pack up all his personal
belongings, and all of hers; when he's discharged from the hospital,
I'll ship them wherever he wants them. But he won't be allowed to come
back here. After this business, I'm through with him."

T. Barnwell Powell nodded primly. "I don't blame you, in the least,
Colonel," he said. "I think you have been abominably treated, and your
attitude is most generous." He was about to say something else, when the
doorbell tinkled and Sergeant Williamson went out into the hall. "Oh,
dear; I suppose that's the police, now," the lawyer said. He grimaced
like a small boy in a dentist's chair.

Colonel Hampton felt Dearest leave him for a moment. Then she was back.

"The ambulance." Then he caught a sparkle of mischief in her mood.
"Let's have some fun, Popsy! The doctor is a young man, with brown hair
and a mustache, horn-rimmed glasses, a blue tie and a tan-leather bag.
One of the ambulance men has red hair, and the other has a
mercurochrome-stain on his left sleeve. Tell them your spirit-guide told
you."

The old soldier's tobacco-yellowed mustache twitched with amusement.

"No, gentlemen, it is the ambulance," he corrected. "My spirit-control
says...." He relayed Dearest's descriptions to them.

T. Barnwell Powell blinked. A speculative look came into the
psychiatrist's eyes; he was probably wishing the commitment paper hadn't
been destroyed.

Then the doctor came bustling in, brown-mustached, blue-tied,
spectacled, carrying a tan bag, and behind him followed the two
ambulance men, one with a thatch of flaming red hair and the other with
a stain of mercurochrome on his jacket-sleeve.

For an instant, the lawyer and the psychiatrist gaped at them. Then T.
Barnwell Powell put one hand to his mouth and made a small gibbering
sound, and Doctor Vehrner gave a faint squawk, and then both men
grabbed, simultaneously, for the whiskey bottle.

The laughter of Dearest tinkled inaudibly through the rumbling mirth of
Colonel Hampton.


_BOOKEND_



There were still, in 1968, a few people who were afraid of the nuclear
power plant. Oldsters, in whom the term "atomic energy" produced
semantic reactions associated with Hiroshima. Those who saw, in the
towering steam-column above it, a tempting target for enemy--which still
meant Soviet--bombers and guided missiles. Some of the Central
Intelligence and F.B.I. people, who realized how futile even the most
elaborate security measures were against a resourceful and suicidally
determined saboteur. And a minority of engineers and nuclear physicists
who remained unpersuaded that accidental blowups at nuclear-reaction
plants were impossible.

Scott Melroy was among these last. He knew, as a matter of fact, that
there had been several nasty, meticulously unpublicized,
near-catastrophes at the Long Island Nuclear Reaction Plant, all
involving the new Doernberg-Giardano breeder-reactors, and that there
had been considerable carefully-hushed top-level acrimony before the
Melroy Engineering Corporation had been given the contract to install
the fully cybernetic control system intended to prevent a recurrence of
such incidents.

That had been three months ago. Melroy and his people had moved in, been
assigned sections of a couple of machine shops, set up an assembly shop
and a set of plyboard-partitioned offices in a vacant warehouse just
outside the reactor area, and tried to start work, only to run into the
almost interminable procedural disputes and jurisdictional wranglings of
the sort which he privately labeled "bureau bunk". It was only now that
he was ready to begin work on the reactors.

He sat at his desk, in the inner of three successively smaller offices
on the second floor of the converted warehouse, checking over a
symbolic-logic analysis of a relay system and, at the same time,
sharpening a pencil, his knife paring off tiny feathery shavings of
wood. He was a tall, sparely-built, man of indeterminate age, with
thinning sandy hair, a long Gaelic upper lip, and a wide, half-humorous,
half-weary mouth; he wore an open-necked shirt, and an old and shabby
leather jacket, to the left shoulder of which a few clinging flecks of
paint showed where some military emblem had been, long ago. While his
fingers worked with the jackknife and his eyes traveled over the page of
closely-written symbols, his mind was reviewing the eight different ways
in which one of the efficient but treacherous Doernberg-Giardano
reactors could be allowed to reach critical mass, and he was wondering
if there might not be some unsuspected ninth way. That was a possibility
which always lurked in the back of his mind, and lately it had been
giving him surrealistic nightmares.

"Mr. Melroy!" the box on the desk in front of him said suddenly, in a
feminine voice. "Mr. Melroy, Dr. Rives is here."

Melroy picked up the handphone, thumbing on the switch.

"Dr. Rives?" he repeated.

"The psychologist who's subbing for Dr. von Heydenreich," the box told
him patiently.

"Oh, yes. Show him in," Melroy said.

"Right away, Mr. Melroy," the box replied.

       *       *       *       *       *

Replacing the handphone, Melroy wondered, for a moment, why there had
been a hint of suppressed amusement in his secretary's voice. Then the
door opened and he stopped wondering. Dr. Rives wasn't a him; she was a
her. Very attractive looking her, too--dark hair and eyes, rather
long-oval features, clear, lightly tanned complexion, bright red
lipstick put on with a micrometric exactitude that any engineer could
appreciate. She was tall, within four inches of his own six-foot mark,
and she wore a black tailored outfit, perfectly plain, which had
probably cost around five hundred dollars and would have looked severe
and mannish except that the figure under it curved and bulged in just
the right places and to just the right degree.

Melroy rose, laying down knife and pencil and taking his pipe out of his
mouth.

"Good afternoon," he greeted. "Dr. von Heydenreich gave me quite a
favorable account of you--as far as it went. He might have included a
few more data and made it more so.... Won't you sit down?"

The woman laid her handbag on the desk and took the visitor's chair,
impish mirth sparking in her eyes.

"He probably omitted mentioning that the D. is for Doris," she
suggested. "Suppose I'd been an Englishman with a name like Evelyn or
Vivian?"

Melroy tried to visualize her as a male Englishman named Vivian, gave
up, and grinned at her.

"Let this be a lesson," he said. "Inferences are to be drawn from
objects, or descriptions of objects; never from verbal labels. Do you
initial your first name just to see how people react when they meet
you?"

"Well, no, though that's an amusing and sometimes instructive
by-product. It started when I began contributing to some of the
professional journals. There's still a little of what used to be called
male sex-chauvinism among my colleagues, and some who would be favorably
impressed with an article signed D. Warren Rives might snort in contempt
at the same article signed Doris Rives."

"Well, fortunately, Dr. von Heydenreich isn't one of those," Melroy
said. "How is the Herr Doktor, by the way, and just what happened to
him? Miss Kourtakides merely told me that he'd been injured and was in a
hospital in Pittsburgh."

"The Herr Doktor got shot," Doris Rives informed him. "With a charge of
BB's, in a most indelicate portion of his anatomy. He was out hunting,
the last day of small-game season, and somebody mistook him for a
turkey. Nothing really serious, but he's face down in bed, cursing
hideously in German, English, Russian, Italian and French, mainly
because he's missing deer hunting."

"I might have known it," Melroy said in disgust. "The ubiquitous
lame-brain with a dangerous mechanism.... I suppose he briefed you on
what I want done, here?"

"Well, not too completely. I gathered that you want me to give
intelligence tests, or aptitude tests, or something of the sort, to some
of your employees. I'm not really one of these so-called industrial
anthropologists," she explained. "Most of my work, for the past few
years, has been for public-welfare organizations, with subnormal
persons. I told him that, and he said that was why he selected me. He
said one other thing. He said, 'I used to think Melroy had an obsession
about fools; well, after stopping this load of shot, I'm beginning to
think it's a good subject to be obsessed about.'"

Melroy nodded. "'Obsession' will probably do. 'Phobia' would be more
exact. I'm afraid of fools, and the chance that I have one working for
me, here, affects me like having a cobra crawling around my bedroom in
the dark. I want you to locate any who might be in a gang of new men
I've had to hire, so that I can get rid of them."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And just how do you define the term 'fool', Mr. Melroy?" she asked.
"Remember, it has no standard meaning. Republicans apply it to
Democrats, and vice versa."

"Well, I apply it to people who do things without considering possible
consequences. People who pepper distinguished Austrian psychologists in
the pants-seat with turkey-shot, for a starter. Or people who push
buttons to see what'll happen, or turn valves and twiddle with
dial-knobs because they have nothing else to do with their hands. Or
shoot insulators off power lines to see if they can hit them. People who
don't know it's loaded. People who think warning signs are purely
ornamental. People who play practical jokes. People who--"

"I know what you mean. Just day-before-yesterday, I saw a woman toss a
cocktail into an electric heater. She didn't want to drink it, and she
thought it would just go up in steam. The result was slightly
spectacular."

"Next time, she won't do that. She'll probably throw her drink into a
lead-ladle, if there's one around. Well, on a statistical basis, I'd
judge that I have three or four such dud rounds among this new gang I've
hired. I want you to put the finger on them, so I can bounce them before
they blow the whole plant up, which could happen quite easily."

"That," Doris Rives said, "is not going to be as easy as it sounds.
Ordinary intelligence-testing won't be enough. The woman I was speaking
of has an I.Q. well inside the meaning of normal intelligence. She just
doesn't use it."

"Sure." Melroy got a thick folder out of his desk and handed it across.
"Heydenreich thought of that, too. He got this up for me, about five
years ago. The intelligence test is based on the new French Sûreté test
for mentally deficient criminals. Then there's a memory test, and tests
for judgment and discrimination, semantic reactions, temperamental and
emotional makeup, and general mental attitude."

She took the folder and leafed through it. "Yes, I see. I always liked
this Sûreté test. And this memory test is a honey--'One hen, two ducks,
three squawking geese, four corpulent porpoises, five Limerick oysters,
six pairs of Don Alfonso tweezers....' I'd like to see some of these
memory-course boys trying to make visual images of six pairs of Don
Alfonso tweezers. And I'm going to make a copy of this word-association
list. It's really a semantic reaction test; Korzybski would have loved
it. And, of course, our old friend, the Rorschach Ink-Blots. I've always
harbored the impious suspicion that you can prove almost anything you
want to with that. But these question-suggestions for personal interview
are really crafty. Did Heydenreich get them up himself?"

"Yes. And we have stacks and stacks of printed forms for the written
portion of the test, and big cards to summarize each subject on. And we
have a disk-recorder to use in the oral tests. There'll have to be a
pretty complete record of each test, in case--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The office door opened and a bulky man with a black mustache entered,
beating the snow from his overcoat with a battered porkpie hat and
commenting blasphemously on the weather. He advanced into the room until
he saw the woman in the chair beside the desk, and then started to back
out.

"Come on in, Sid," Melroy told him. "Dr. Rives, this is our general
foreman, Sid Keating. Sid, Dr. Rives, the new dimwit detector. Sid's in
direct charge of personnel," he continued, "so you two'll be working
together quite a bit."

"Glad to know you, doctor," Keating said. Then he turned to Melroy.
"Scott, you're really going through with this, then?" he asked. "I'm
afraid we'll have trouble, then."

"Look, Sid," Melroy said. "We've been all over that. Once we start work
on the reactors, you and Ned Puryear and Joe Ricci and Steve Chalmers
can't be everywhere at once. A cybernetic system will only do what it's
been assembled to do, and if some quarter-wit assembles one of these
things wrong--" He left the sentence dangling; both men knew what he
meant.

Keating shook his head. "This union's going to bawl like a branded calf
about it," he predicted. "And if any of the dear sirs and brothers get
washed out--" That sentence didn't need to be completed, either.

"We have a right," Melroy said, "to discharge any worker who is, quote,
of unsound mind, deficient mentality or emotional instability, unquote.
It says so right in our union contract, in nice big print."

"Then they'll claim the tests are wrong."

"I can't see how they can do that," Doris Rives put in, faintly
scandalized.

"Neither can I, and they probably won't either," Keating told her. "But
they'll go ahead and do it. Why, Scott, they're pulling the Number One
Doernberg-Giardano, tonight. By oh-eight-hundred, it ought to be cool
enough to work on. Where will we hold the tests? Here?"

"We'll have to, unless we can get Dr. Rives security-cleared." Melroy
turned to her. "Were you ever security-cleared by any Government
agency?"

"Oh, yes. I was with Armed Forces Medical, Psychiatric Division, in
Indonesia in '62 and '63, and I did some work with mental fatigue cases
at Tonto Basin Research Establishment in '64."

Melroy looked at her sharply. Keating whistled.

"If she could get into Tonto Basin, she can get in here," he declared.

"I should think so. I'll call Colonel Bradshaw, the security officer."

"That way, we can test them right on the job," Keating was saying. "Take
them in relays. I'll talk to Ben about it, and we'll work up some kind
of a schedule." He turned to Doris Rives. "You'll need a wrist-Geiger,
and a dosimeter. We'll furnish them," he told her. "I hope they don't
try to make you carry a pistol, too."

"A pistol?" For a moment, she must have thought he was using some
technical-jargon term, and then it dawned on her that he wasn't. "You
mean--?" She cocked her thumb and crooked her index finger.

"Yeah. A rod. Roscoe. The Equalizer. We all have to." He half-lifted one
out of his side pocket. "We're all United States deputy marshals. They
don't bother much with counterespionage, here, but they don't fool when
it comes to countersabotage. Well, I'll get an order cut and posted. Be
seeing you, doctor."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You think the union will make trouble about these tests?" she asked,
after the general foreman had gone out.

"They're sure to," Melroy replied. "Here's the situation. I have about
fifty of my own men, from Pittsburgh, here, but they can't work on the
reactors because they don't belong to the Industrial Federation of
Atomic Workers, and I can't just pay their initiation fees and union
dues and get union cards for them, because admission to this union is on
an annual quota basis, and this is December, and the quota's full. So I
have to use them outside the reactor area, on fabrication and assembly
work. And I have to hire through the union, and that's handled on a
membership seniority basis, so I have to take what's thrown at me.
That's why I was careful to get that clause I was quoting to Sid written
into my contract.

"Now, here's what's going to happen. Most of the men'll take the test
without protest, but a few of them'll raise the roof about it. Nothing
burns a moron worse than to have somebody question his fractional
intelligence. The odds are that the ones that yell the loudest about
taking the test will be the ones who get scrubbed out, and when the test
shows that they're deficient, they won't believe it. A moron simply
cannot conceive of his being anything less than perfectly intelligent,
any more than a lunatic can conceive of his being less than perfectly
sane. So they'll claim we're framing them, for an excuse to fire them.
And the union will have to back them up, right or wrong, at least on the
local level. That goes without saying. In any dispute, the employer is
always wrong and the worker is always right, until proven otherwise. And
that takes a lot of doing, believe me!"

"Well, if they're hired through the union, on a seniority basis,
wouldn't they be likely to be experienced and competent workers?" she
asked.

"Experienced, yes. That is, none of them has ever been caught doing
anything downright calamitous ... yet," Melroy replied. "The moron I'm
afraid of can go on for years, doing routine work under supervision, and
nothing'll happen. Then, some day, he does something on his own
lame-brained initiative, and when he does, it's only at the whim of
whatever gods there be that the result isn't a wholesale catastrophe.
And people like that are the most serious threat facing our civilization
today, atomic war not excepted."

Dr. Doris Rives lifted a delicately penciled eyebrow over that. Melroy,
pausing to relight his pipe, grinned at her.

"You think that's the old obsession talking?" he asked. "Could be. But
look at this plant, here. It generates every kilowatt of current used
between Trenton and Albany, the New York metropolitan area included.
Except for a few little storage-battery or Diesel generator systems,
that couldn't handle one tenth of one per cent of the barest minimum
load, it's been the only source of electric current here since 1962,
when the last coal-burning power plant was dismantled. Knock this plant
out and you darken every house and office and factory and street in the
area. You immobilize the elevators--think what that would mean in lower
and midtown Manhattan alone. And the subways. And the new endless-belt
conveyors that handle eighty per cent of the city's freight traffic. And
the railroads--there aren't a dozen steam or Diesel locomotives left in
the whole area. And the pump stations for water and gas and fuel oil.
And seventy per cent of the space-heating is electric, now. Why, you
can't imagine what it'd be like. It's too gigantic. But what you can
imagine would be a nightmare.

"You know, it wasn't so long ago, when every home lighted and heated
itself, and every little industry was a self-contained unit, that a fool
couldn't do great damage unless he inherited a throne or was placed in
command of an army, and that didn't happen nearly as often as our
leftist social historians would like us to think. But today, everything
we depend upon is centralized, and vulnerable to blunder-damage. Even
our food--remember that poisoned soft-drink horror in Chicago, in 1963;
three thousand hospitalized and six hundred dead because of one man's
stupid mistake at a bottling plant." He shook himself slightly, as
though to throw off some shadow that had fallen over him, and looked at
his watch. "Sixteen hundred. How did you get here? Fly your own plane?"

"No; I came by T.W.A. from Pittsburgh. I have a room at the new Midtown
City hotel, on Forty-seventh Street: I had my luggage sent on there from
the airport and came out on the Long Island subway."

"Fine. I have a room at Midtown City, myself, though I sleep here about
half the time." He nodded toward a door on the left. "Suppose we go in
and have dinner together. This cafeteria, here, is a horrible place.
It's run by a dietitian instead of a chef, and everything's so
white-enamel antiseptic that I swear I smell belladonna-icthyol ointment
every time I go in the place. Wait here till I change clothes."

       *       *       *       *       *

At the Long Island plant, no one was concerned about espionage--neither
the processes nor the equipment used there were secret--but the
countersabotage security was fantastically thorough. Every person or
scrap of material entering the reactor area was searched; the
life-history of every man and woman employed there was known back to the
cradle. A broad highway encircled it outside the fence, patrolled night
and day by twenty General Stuart cavalry-tanks. There were a thousand
soldiers, and three hundred Atomic Power Authority police, and only God
knew how many F.B.I, and Central Intelligence undercover agents. Every
supervisor and inspector and salaried technician was an armed United
States deputy marshal. And nobody, outside the Department of Defense,
knew how much radar and counter-rocket and fighter protection the place
had, but the air-defense zone extended from Boston to Philadelphia and
as far inland as Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania.

The Long Island Nuclear Power Plant, Melroy thought, had all the
invulnerability of Achilles--and no more.

The six new Doernberg-Giardano breeder-reactors clustered in a circle
inside a windowless concrete building at the center of the plant. Beside
their primary purpose of plutonium production, they furnished heat for
the sea-water distillation and chemical extraction system, processing
the water that was run through the steam boilers at the main power
reactors, condensed, redistilled, and finally pumped, pure, into the
water mains of New York. Safe outside the shielding, in a corner of a
high-ceilinged room, was the plyboard-screened on-the-job office of the
Melroy Engineering Corporation's timekeepers and foremen. Beyond, along
the far wall, were the washroom and locker room and lunch room of the
workmen.

Sixty or seventy men, mostly in white coveralls and all wearing
identification badges and carrying dosimeters in their breast pockets
and midget Geigers strapped to their wrists, were crowded about the
bulletin-board in front of the makeshift office. There was a hum of
voices--some perplexed or angry, but mostly good-humored and bantering.
As Melroy and Doris Rives approached, the talking died out and the men
turned. In the sudden silence, one voice, harshly strident, continued:

"... do they think this is, anyhow? We don't hafta take none of that."

Somebody must have nudged the speaker, trying without success to hush
him. The bellicose voice continued, and Melroy spotted the
speaker--short, thick-set, his arms jutting out at an angle from his
body, his heavy features soured with anger.

"Like we was a lotta halfwits, 'r nuts, 'r some'n! Well, we don't hafta
stand for this. They ain't got no right--"

Doris Rives clung tighter to Melroy's arm as he pushed a way for himself
and her through the crowd and into the temporary office. Inside, they
were met by a young man with a deputy marshal's badge on his flannel
shirt and a .38 revolver on his hip.

"Ben Puryear: Dr. Rives," Melroy introduced. "Who's the mouthy character
outside?"

"One of the roustabouts; name's Burris," Puryear replied. "Wash-room
lawyer."

Melroy nodded. "You always get one or two like that. How're the rest
taking it?"

Puryear shrugged. "About how you'd expect. A lot of kidding about who's
got any intelligence to test. Burris seems to be the only one who's
trying to make an issue out of it."

"Well, what are they doing ganged up here?" Melroy wanted to know. "It's
past oh-eight-hundred; why aren't they at work?"

"Reactor's still too hot. Temperature and radioactivity both too high;
radioactivity's still up around eight hundred REM's."

"Well, then, we'll give them all the written portion of the test
together, and start the personal interviews and oral tests as soon as
they're through." He turned to Doris Rives. "Can you give all of them
the written test together?" he asked. "And can Ben help
you--distributing forms, timing the test, seeing that there's no
fudging, and collecting the forms when they're done?"

"Oh, yes; all they'll have to do is follow the printed instructions."
She looked around. "I'll need a desk, and an extra chair for the
interview subject."

"Right over here, doctor." Puryear said. "And here are the forms and
cards, and the sound-recorder, and blank sound disks."

"Yes," Melroy added. "Be sure you get a recording of every interview and
oral test; we may need them for evidence."

He broke off as a man in white coveralls came pushing into the office.
He was a scrawny little fellow with a wide, loose-lipped mouth and a
protuberant Adam's apple; beside his identity badge, he wore a two-inch
celluloid button lettered: I.F.A.W. STEWARD.

"Wanta use the phone," he said. "Union business."

Melroy gestured toward a telephone on the desk beside him. The newcomer
shook his head, twisting his mouth into a smirk.

"Not that one; the one with the whisper mouthpiece," he said. "This is
private union business."

       *       *       *       *       *

Melroy shrugged and indicated another phone. The man with the union
steward's badge picked it up, dialed, and held a lengthy conversation
into it, turning his head away in case Melroy might happen to be a lip
reader. Finally he turned.

"Mr. Crandall wants to talk to you," he said, grinning triumphantly, the
phone extended to Melroy.

The engineer picked up another phone, snapping a button on the base of
it.

"Melroy here," he said.

Something on the line started going _bee-beep-beep_ softly.

"Crandall, executive secretary, I.F.A.W.," the man on the other end of
the line identified himself. "Is there a recorder going on this line?"

"Naturally," Melroy replied. "I record all business conversations;
office routine."

"Mr. Melroy, I've been informed that you propose forcing our members in
your employ to submit to some kind of a mental test. Is that correct?"

"Not exactly. I'm not able to force anybody to submit to anything
against his will. If anybody objects to taking these tests, he can say
so, and I'll have his time made out and pay him off."

"That's the same thing. A threat of dismissal is coercion, and if these
men want to keep their jobs they'll have to take this test."

"Well, that's stated more or less correctly," Melroy conceded. "Let's
just put it that taking--and passing--this test is a condition of
employment. My contract with your union recognizes my right to establish
standards of intelligence; that's implied by my recognized right to
dismiss any person of 'unsound mind, deficient mentality or emotional
instability.' Psychological testing is the only means of determining
whether or not a person is classifiable in those terms."

"Then, in case the test purports to show that one of these men is, let's
say, mentally deficient, you intend dismissing him?"

"With the customary two weeks' severance-pay, yes."

"Well, if you do dismiss anybody on those grounds, the union will have
to insist on reviewing the grounds for dismissal."

"My contract with your union says nothing whatever about any right of
review being reserved by the union in such cases. Only in cases of
disciplinary dismissal, which this is not. I take the position that
certain minimum standards of intelligence and mental stability are
essentials in this sort of work, just as, say, certain minimum standards
of literacy are essential in clerical work."

"Then you're going to make these men take these tests, whatever they
are?"

"If they want to work for me, yes. And anybody who fails to pass them
will be dropped from my payroll."

"And who's going to decide whether or not these men have successfully
passed these tests?" Crandall asked. "You?"

"Good Lord, no! I'm an electronics engineer, not a psychologist. The
tests are being given, and will be evaluated, by a graduate
psychologist, Dr. D. Warren Rives, who has a diploma from the American
Board of Psychiatry and Neurology and is a member of the American
Psychological Association. Dr. Rives will be the final arbiter on who is
or is not disqualified by these tests."

"Well, our man Koffler says you have some girl there to give the tests,"
Crandall accused.

"I suppose he means Dr. Rives," Melroy replied. "I can assure you, she
is an extremely competent psychologist, however. She came to me most
highly recommended by Dr. Karl von Heydenreich, who is not inclined to
be careless with his recommendations."

"Well, Mr. Melroy, we don't want any more trouble with you than we have
to have," Crandall told him, "but we will insist on reviewing any
dismissals which occur as a result of these tests."

"You can do that. I'd advise, first, that you read over the contract you
signed with me. Get a qualified lawyer to tell you what we've agreed to
and what we haven't. Was there anything else you wanted to talk
about?... No?... Then good morning, Mr. Crandall."

He hung up. "All right; let's get on with it," he said. "Ben, you get
them into the lunch room; there are enough tables and benches in there
for everybody to take the written test in two relays."

"The union's gotta be represented while these tests is going on," the
union steward announced. "Mr. Crandall says I'm to stay here an' watch
what you do to these guys."

"This man working for us?" Melroy asked Puryear.

"Yes. Koffler, Julius. Electrical fitter; Joe Ricci's gang."

"All right. See to it that he gets placed in the first relay for the
written test, and gets first turn for the orals. That way he can spend
the rest of his time on duty here for the union, and will know in
advance what the test is like." He turned to Koffler. "But understand
this. You keep your mouth out of it. If you see anything that looks
objectionable, make a note of it, but don't try to interfere."

The written tests, done on printed forms, required about twenty minutes.
Melroy watched the process of oral testing and personal interviewing for
a while, then picked up a big flashlight and dropped it into his
overcoat pocket, preparatory to going out to inspect some equipment that
had been assembled outside the reactor area and brought in. As he went
out, Koffler was straddling a chair, glowering at Doris Rives and making
occasional ostentatious notes on a pad.

       *       *       *       *       *

For about an hour, he poked around the newly assembled apparatus,
checking the wiring, and peering into it. When he returned to the
temporary office, the oral testing was still going on; Koffler was still
on duty as watcher for the union, but the sport had evidently palled on
him, for he was now studying a comic book.

Melroy left the reactor area and returned to the office in the converted
area. During the midafternoon, somebody named Leighton called him from
the Atomic Power Authority executive office, wanting to know what was
the trouble between him and the I.F.A.W. and saying that a protest
against his alleged high-handed and arbitrary conduct had been received
from the union.

Melroy explained, at length. He finished: "You people have twenty Stuart
tanks, and a couple of thousand soldiers and cops and undercover-men,
here, guarding against sabotage. Don't you realize that a workman who
makes stupid or careless or impulsive mistakes is just as dangerous to
the plant as any saboteur? If somebody shoots you through the head, it
doesn't matter whether he planned to murder you for a year or just
didn't know the gun was loaded; you're as dead one way as the other. I
should think you'd thank me for trying to eliminate a serious source of
danger."

"Now, don't misunderstand my position, Mr. Melroy," the other man
hastened to say. "I sympathize with your attitude, entirely. But these
people are going to make trouble."

"If they do, it'll be my trouble. I'm under contract to install this
cybernetic system for you; you aren't responsible for my labor policy,"
Melroy replied. "Oh, have you had much to do with this man Crandall,
yourself?"

"Have I had--!" Leighton sputtered for a moment. "I'm in charge of
personnel, here; that makes me his top-priority target, all the time."

"Well, what sort of a character is he, anyhow? When I contracted with
the I.F.A.W., my lawyer and their lawyer handled everything; I never
even met him."

"Well--He has his job to do, the same as I have," Leighton said. "He
does it conscientiously. But it's like this--anything a workman tells
him is the truth, and anything an employer tells him is a dirty lie.
Until proven differently, of course, but that takes a lot of doing. And
he goes off half-cocked a lot of times. He doesn't stop to analyze
situations very closely."

"That's what I was afraid of. Well, you tell him you don't have any
control over my labor relations. Tell him to bring his gripes to me."

       *       *       *       *       *

At sixteen-thirty, Doris Rives came in, finding him still at his desk.

"I have the written tests all finished, and I have about twenty of the
tests and interviews completed," she said. "I'll have to evaluate the
results, though. I wonder if there's a vacant desk around here,
anywhere, and a record player."

"Yes, sure. Ask Joan to fix you up; she'll find a place for you to work.
And if you're going to be working late, I'll order some dinner for you
from the cafeteria. I'm going to be here all evening, myself."

Sid Keating came in, a short while later, peeling out of his overcoat,
jacket and shoulder holster.

"I don't think they got everything out of that reactor," he said.
"Radioactivity's still almost active-normal--about eight hundred
REM's--and the temperature's away up, too. That isn't lingering
radiation; that's prompt radiation."

"Radioactivity hasn't dropped since morning; I'd think so, too," Melroy
said. "What are they getting on the breakdown counter?"

"Mostly neutrons and alpha-particles. I talked to Fred Hausinger, the
maintenance boss; he doesn't like it, either."

"Well, I'm no nuclear physicist," Melroy disclaimed, "but all that alpha
stuff looks like a big chunk of Pu-239 left inside. What's Fred doing
about it?"

"Oh, poking around inside the reactor with telemetered scanners and
remote-control equipment. When I left, he had a gang pulling out
graphite blocks with RC-tongs. We probably won't get a chance to work on
it much before thirteen-hundred tomorrow." He unzipped a bulky brief
case he had brought in under his arm and dumped papers onto his desk. "I
still have this stuff to get straightened out, too."

"Had anything to eat? Then call the cafeteria and have them send up
three dinners. Dr. Rives is eating here, too. Find out what she wants; I
want pork chops."

"Uh-huh; Li'l Abner Melroy; po'k chops unless otherwise specified."
Keating got up and went out into the middle office. As he opened the
door. Melroy could hear a recording of somebody being given a
word-association test.

Half an hour later, when the food arrived, they spread their table on a
relatively clear desk in the middle office. Doris Rives had finished
evaluating the completed tests; after dinner, she intended going over
the written portions of the uncompleted tests.

"How'd the finished tests come out?" Melroy asked her.

"Better than I'd expected. Only two washouts," she replied. "Harvey
Burris and Julius Koffler."

"Oh, _no_!" Keating wailed. "The I.F.A.W. steward, and the
loudest-mouthed I-know-my-rights boy on the job!"

"Well, wasn't that to be expected?" Melroy asked. "If you'd seen the act
those two put on--"

"They're both inherently stupid, infantile, and deficient in reasoning
ability and judgment," Doris said. "Koffler is a typical adolescent
problem-child show-off type, and Burris is an almost perfect
twelve-year-old schoolyard bully. They both have inferiority complexes
long enough to step on. If the purpose of this test is what I'm led to
believe it is, I can't, in professional good conscience, recommend
anything but that you get rid of both of them."

"What Bob's getting at is that they're the very ones who can claim, with
the best show of plausibility, that the test is just a pretext to fire
them for union activities," Melroy explained. "And the worst of it is,
they're the only ones."

"Maybe we can scrub out a couple more on the written tests alone. Then
they'll have company," Keating suggested.

"No, I can't do that." Doris was firm on the point. "The written part of
the test was solely for ability to reason logically. Just among the
three of us, I know some university professors who'd flunk on that. But
if the rest of the tests show stability, sense of responsibility, good
judgment, and a tendency to think before acting, the subject can be
classified as a safe and reliable workman."

"Well, then, let's don't say anything till we have the tests all
finished," Keating proposed.

"No!" Melroy cried. "Every minute those two are on the job, there's a
chance they may do something disastrous. I'll fire them at
oh-eight-hundred tomorrow."

"All right," Keating shook his head. "I only work here. But don't say I
didn't warn you."

       *       *       *       *       *

By 0930 the next morning, Keating's forebodings began to be realized.
The first intimation came with a phone call to Melroy from Crandall, who
accused him of having used the psychological tests as a fraudulent
pretext for discharging Koffler and Burris for union activities. When
Melroy rejected his demand that the two men be reinstated, Crandall
demanded to see the records of the tests.

"They're here at my office," Melroy told him. "You're welcome to look at
them, and hear recordings of the oral portions of the tests. But I'd
advise you to bring a professional psychologist along, because unless
you're a trained psychologist yourself, they're not likely to mean much
to you."

"Oh, sure!" Crandall retorted. "They'd have to be unintelligible to
ordinary people, or you couldn't get away with this frame-up! Well,
don't worry, I'll be along to see them."

Within ten minutes, the phone rang again. This time it was Leighton, the
Atomic Power Authority man.

"We're much disturbed about this dispute between your company and the
I.F.A.W.," he began.

"Well, frankly, so am I," Melroy admitted. "I'm here to do a job, not
play Hatfields and McCoys with this union. I've had union trouble
before, and it isn't fun. You're the gentleman who called me last
evening, aren't you? Then you understand my position in the matter."

"Certainly, Mr. Melroy. I was talking to Colonel Bradshaw, the security
officer, last evening. He agrees that a stupid or careless workman is,
under some circumstances, a more serious threat to security than any
saboteur. And we realize fully how dangerous those Doernberg-Giardanos
are, and how much more dangerous they'd be if these cybernetic controls
were improperly assembled. But this man Crandall is talking about
calling a strike."

"Well, let him. In the first place, it'd be against me, not against the
Atomic Power Authority. And, in the second place, if he does and it goes
to Federal mediation, his demand for the reinstatement of those men will
be thrown out, and his own organization will have to disavow his action,
because he'll be calling the strike against his own contract."

"Well, I hope so." Leighton's tone indicated that the hope was rather
dim. "I wish you luck; you're going to need it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Within the hour, Crandall arrived at Melroy's office. He was a young
man; he gave Melroy the impression of having recently seen military
service; probably in the Indonesian campaign of '62 and '63; he also
seemed a little cocky and over-sure of himself.

"Mr. Melroy, we're not going to stand for this," he began, as soon as he
came into the room. "You're using these so-called tests as a pretext for
getting rid of Mr. Koffler and Mr. Burris because of their legitimate
union activities."

"Who gave you that idea?" Melroy wanted to know. "Koffler and Burris?"

"That's the complaint they made to me, and it's borne out by the facts,"
Crandall replied. "We have on record at least half a dozen complaints
that Mr. Koffler has made to us about different unfair work-assignments,
improper working conditions, inequities in allotting overtime work, and
other infractions of union-shop conditions, on behalf of Mr. Burris. So
you decided to get rid of both of them, and you think you can use this
clause in our contract with your company about persons of deficient
intelligence. The fact is, you're known to have threatened on several
occasions to get rid of both of them."

"I am?" Melroy looked at Crandall curiously, wondering if the latter
were serious, and deciding that he was. "You must believe _anything_
those people tell you. Well, they lied to you if they told you that."

"Naturally that's what you'd say," Crandall replied. "But how do you
account for the fact that those two men, and only those two men, were
dismissed for alleged deficient intelligence?"

"The tests aren't all made," Melroy replied. "Until they are, you can't
say that they are the only ones disqualified. And if you look over the
records of the tests, you'll see where Koffler and Burris failed and the
others passed. Here." He laid the pile of written-test forms and the
summary and evaluation sheets on the desk. "Here's Koffler's, and here's
Burris'; these are the ones of the men who passed the test. Look them
over if you want to."

Crandall examined the forms and summaries for the two men who had been
discharged, and compared them with several random samples from the
satisfactory pile.

"Why, this stuff's a lot of gibberish!" he exclaimed indignantly. "This
thing, here: ... five Limerick oysters, six pairs of Don Alfonso
tweezers, seven hundred Macedonian warriors in full battle array, eight
golden crowns from the ancient, secret crypts of Egypt, nine lymphatic,
sympathetic, peripatetic old men on crutches, and ten revolving
heliotropes from the Ipsy-Wipsy Institute!' Great Lord, do you actually
mean that you're using this stuff as an excuse for depriving men of
their jobs?"

"I warned you that you should have brought a professional psychologist
along," Melroy reminded him. "And maybe you ought to get Koffler and
Burris to repeat their complaints on a lie-detector, while you're at it.
They took the same tests, in the same manner, as any of the others. They
just didn't have the mental equipment to cope with them and the others
did. And for that reason, I won't run the risk of having them working on
this job."

"That's just your word against theirs," Crandall insisted obstinately.
"Their complaint is that you framed this whole thing up to get rid of
them."

"Why, I didn't even know who either of them were, until yesterday
morning."

"That's not the way they tell it," Crandall retorted. "They say you and
Keating have been out to get them ever since they were hired. You and
your supervisors have been persecuting both of those men systematically.
The fact that Burris has had grounds for all these previous complaints
proves that."

"It proves that Burris has a persecution complex, and that Koffler's
credulous enough to believe him," Melroy replied. "And that tends to
confirm the results of the tests they failed to pass."

"Oh, so that's the line you're taking. You persecute a man, and then say
he has a persecution complex if he recognizes the fact. Well, you're not
going to get away with it, that's all I have to say to you." Crandall
flung the test-sheet he had been holding on to the desk. "That stuff's
not worth the paper it's scribbled on!" He turned on his heel in an
automatically correct about-face and strode out of the office.

       *       *       *       *       *

Melroy straightened out the papers and put them away, then sat down at
his desk, filling and lighting his pipe. He was still working at 1215
when Ben Puryear called him.

"They walked out on us," he reported. "Harry Crandall was out here
talking to them, and at noon the whole gang handed in their
wrist-Geigers and dosimeters and cleared out their lockers. They say
they aren't coming back till Burris and Koffler come back to work with
them."

"Then they aren't coming back, period," Melroy replied. "Crandall was to
see me, a couple of hours ago. He tells me that Burris and Koffler told
him that we've been persecuting Burris; discriminating against him. You
know of anything that really happened that might make them think
anything like that?"

"No. Burris is always yelling about not getting enough overtime work,
but you know how it is: he's just a roustabout, a common laborer. Any
overtime work that has to be done is usually skilled labor on this job.
We generally have a few roustabouts to help out, but he's been allowed
to make overtime as much as any of the others."

"Will the time-records show that?"

"They ought to. I don't know what he and Koffler told Crandall, but
whatever it was, I'll bet they were lying."

"That's all right, then. How's the reactor, now?"

"Hausinger says the count's down to safe limits, and the temperature's
down to inactive normal. He and his gang found a big chunk of plutonium,
about one-quarter CM, inside. He got it out."

"All right. Tell Dr. Rives to gather up all her completed or partially
completed test records and come out to the office. You and the others
stay on the job; we may have some men for you by this afternoon;
tomorrow morning certainly."

He hung up, then picked up the communicator phone and called his
secretary.

"Joan, is Sid Keating out there? Send him in, will you?"

Keating, when he entered, was wearing the lugubriously gratified
expression appropriate to the successful prophet of disaster.

"All right, Cassandra," Melroy greeted him. "I'm not going to say you
didn't warn me. Look. This strike is illegal. It's a violation of the
Federal Labor Act of 1958, being called without due notice of intention,
without preliminary negotiation, and without two weeks' time-allowance."

"They're going to claim that it isn't a strike. They're going to call it
a 'spontaneous work-stoppage.'"

"Aah! I hope I can get Crandall on record to that effect; I'll fire
every one of those men for leaving their work without permission and
absence from duty without leave. How many of our own men, from
Pittsburgh, do we have working in these machine shops and in the
assembly shop here? About sixty?"

"Sixty-three. Why? You're not going to use them to work on the reactor,
are you?"

"I just am. They're all qualified cybernetics technicians; they can do
this work better than this gang we've had to hire here. Just to be on
the safe side, I'm promoting all of them, as of oh-eight-hundred this
morning, to assistant gang-foremen, on salaries. That'll take them
outside union jurisdiction."

"But how about our contract with the I.F.A.W.?"

"That's been voided, by Crandall's own act, in interfering with the
execution of our contract with the Atomic Power Authority. You know what
I think? I think the I.F.A.W. front office is going to have to disavow
this. It'll hurt them to do it, but they'll have to. Crandall's put them
in the middle on this."

"How about security clearance for our own men?"

"Nothing to that," Melroy said. "Most of them are security-cleared,
already, from the work we did installing that counter-rocket control
system on the U.S.S. _Alaska_, and the work we did on that
symbolic-logic computer for the Philadelphia Project. It may take all
day to get the red tape unwound, but I think we can be ready to start by
oh-eight-hundred tomorrow."

       *       *       *       *       *

By the time Keating had rounded up all the regular Melroy Engineering
Corporation employees and Melroy had talked to Colonel Bradshaw about
security-clearance, it was 1430. A little later, he was called on the
phone by Leighton, the Atomic Power Authority man.

"Melroy, what are you trying to do?" the Power Authority man demanded.
"Get this whole plant struck shut? The I.F.A.W.'s madder than a
shot-stung bobcat. They claim you're going to bring in strike-breakers;
they're talking about picketing the whole reactor area."

"News gets around fast, here, doesn't it?" Melroy commented. He told
Leighton what he had in mind. The Power Authority man was considerably
shaken before he had finished.

"But they'll call a strike on the whole plant! Have you any idea what
that would mean?"

"Certainly I have. They'll either call it in legal form, in which case
the whole thing will go to mediation and get aired, which is what I
want, or they'll pull a Pearl Harbor on you, the way they did on me. And
in that case, the President will have to intervene, and they'll fly in
technicians from some of the Armed Forces plants to keep this place
running. And in that case, things'll get settled that much quicker. This
Crandall thinks these men I fired are martyrs, and he's preaching a
crusade. He ought to carry an _advocatus diaboli_ on his payroll, to
scrutinize the qualifications of his martyrs, before he starts
canonizing them."

A little later, Doris Rives came into the office, her hands full of
papers and cards.

"I have twelve more tests completed," she reported. "Only one washout."

Melroy laughed. "Doctor, they're all washed out," he told her. "It seems
there was an additional test, and they all flunked it. Evinced
willingness to follow unwise leadership and allow themselves to be
talked into improper courses of action. You go on in to New York, and
take all the test-material, including sound records, with you. Stay at
the hotel--your pay will go on--till I need you. There'll be a Federal
Mediation hearing in a day or so."

He had two more telephone calls. The first, at 1530, was from Leighton.
Melroy suspected that the latter had been medicating his morale with a
couple of stiff drinks: his voice was almost jaunty.

"Well, the war's on," he announced. "The I.F.A.W.'s walking out on the
whole plant, at oh-eight-hundred tomorrow."

"In violation of the Federal Labor Act, Section Eight, paragraphs four
and five," Melroy supplemented. "Crandall really has stuck his neck in
the guillotine. What's Washington doing?"

"President Hartley is ordering Navy personnel flown in from
Kennebunkport Reaction Lab; they will be here by about oh-three-hundred
tomorrow. And a couple of Federal mediators are coming in to La Guardia
at seventeen hundred; they're going to hold preliminary hearings at the
new Federal Building on Washington Square beginning twenty hundred. A
couple of I.F.A.W. negotiators are coming in from the national union
headquarters at Oak Ridge: they should be getting in about the same
time. You'd better be on hand, and have Dr. Rives there with you.
There's a good chance this thing may get cleared up in a day or so."

"I will undoubtedly be there, complete with Dr. Rives," Melroy replied.
"It will be a pleasure!"

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, Ben Puryear called from the reactor area, his voice
strained with anger.

"Scott, do you know what those--" He gargled obscenities for a moment.
"You know what they've done? They've re-packed the Number One
Doernberg-Giardano; got a chain-reaction started again."

"Who?"

"Fred Hausinger's gang. Apparently at Harry Crandall's orders. The
excuse was that it would be unsafe to leave the reactor in its
dismantled condition during a prolonged shutdown--they were assuming, I
suppose, that the strike would be allowed to proceed unopposed--but of
course the real reason was that they wanted to get a chain-reaction
started to keep our people from working on the reactor."

"Well, didn't Hausinger try to stop them?"

"Not very hard. I asked him what he had that deputy marshal's badge on
his shirt and that Luger on his hip for, but he said he had orders not
to use force, for fear of prejudicing the mediators."

Melroy swore disgustedly. "All right. Gather up all our private papers,
and get Steve and Joe, and come on out. We only work here--when we're
able."

       *       *       *       *       *

Doris Rives was waiting on the street level when Melroy reached the new
Federal Building, in what had formerly been the Greenwich Village
district of Manhattan, that evening. She had a heavy brief case with
her, which he took.

"I was afraid I'd keep you waiting," she said. "I came down from the
hotel by cab, and there was a frightful jam at Fortieth Street, and
another one just below Madison Square."

"Yes, it gets worse every year. Pardon my obsession, but nine times out
of ten--ninety-nine out of a hundred--it's the fault of some fool doing
something stupid. Speaking about doing stupid things, though--I did one.
Forgot to take that gun out of my overcoat pocket, and didn't notice
that I had it till I was on the subway, coming in. Have a big flashlight
in the other pocket, but that doesn't matter. What I'm worried about is
that somebody'll find out I have a gun and raise a howl about my coming
armed to a mediation hearing."

The hearing was to be held in one of the big conference rooms on the
forty-second floor. Melroy was careful to remove his overcoat and lay it
on a table in the corner, and then help Doris off with hers and lay it
on top of his own. There were three men in the room when they arrived:
Kenneth Leighton, the Atomic Power Authority man, fiftyish, acquiring a
waistline bulge and losing his hair: a Mr. Lyons, tall and slender, with
white hair; and a Mr. Quillen, considerably younger, with plastic-rimmed
glasses. The latter two were the Federal mediators. All three had been
lounging in arm-chairs, talking about the new plays on Broadway. They
all rose when Melroy and Doris Rives came over to join them.

"We mustn't discuss business until the others get here," Leighton
warned. "It's bad enough that all three of us got here ahead of them;
they'll be sure to think we're trying to take an unfair advantage of
them. I suppose neither of you have had time to see any of the new
plays."

Fortunately, Doris and Melroy had gone to the theater after dinner, the
evening-before-last; they were able to join the conversation. Young Mr.
Quillen wanted Doris Rives' opinion, as a psychologist, of the mental
processes of the heroine of the play they had seen; as nearly as she
could determine, Doris replied, the heroine in question had exhibited
nothing even loosely describable as mental processes of any sort. They
were still on the subject when the two labor negotiators, Mr. Cronnin
and Mr. Fields, arrived. Cronnin was in his sixties, with the
nearsighted squint and compressed look of concentration of an old-time
precision machinist; Fields was much younger, and sported a Phi Beta
Kappa key.

Lyons, who seemed to be the senior mediator, thereupon called the
meeting to order and they took their places at the table.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now, gentlemen--and Dr. Rives--this will be simply an informal
discussion, so that everybody can see what everybody else's position in
the matter is. We won't bother to make a sound recording. Then, if we
have managed to reach some common understanding of the question this
evening, we can start the regular hearing say at thirteen hundred
tomorrow. Is that agreeable?"

It was. The younger mediator, Quillen, cleared his throat.

"It seems, from our information, that this entire dispute arises from
the discharge, by Mr. Melroy, of two of his employees, named Koffler and
Burris. Is that correct?"

"Well, there's also the question of the Melroy Engineering Corporation's
attempting to use strike-breakers, and the Long Island Atomic Power
Authority's having condoned this unfair employment practice," Cronnin
said, acidly.

"And there's also the question of the I.F.A.W.'s calling a Pearl Harbor
strike on my company," Melroy added.

"We resent that characterization!" Cronnin retorted.

"It's a term in common usage; it denotes a strike called without warning
or declaration of intention, which this was," Melroy told him.

"And there's also the question of the I.F.A.W. calling a general strike,
in illegal manner, at the Long Island Reaction Plant," Leighton spoke
up. "On sixteen hours' notice."

"Well, that wasn't the fault of the I.F.A.W. as an organization," Fields
argued. "Mr. Cronnin and I are agreed that the walk-out date should be
postponed for two weeks, in accordance with the provisions of the
Federal Labor Act."

"Well, how about my company?" Melroy wanted to know. "Your I.F.A.W.
members walked out on me, without any notice whatever, at twelve hundred
today. Am I to consider that an act of your union, or will you disavow
it so that I can fire all of them for quitting without permission?"

"And how about the action of members of your union, acting on
instructions from Harry Crandall, in re-packing the Number One
Doernberg-Giardano breeder-reactor at our plant, after the plutonium and
the U-238 and the neutron-source containers had been removed, in order
to re-initiate a chain reaction to prevent Mr. Melroy's employees from
working on the reactor?" Leighton demanded. "Am I to understand that the
union sustains that action, too?"

"I hadn't known about that," Fields said, somewhat startled.

"Neither had I," Cronnin added. "When did it happen?"

"About sixteen hundred today," Melroy told him.

"We were on the plane from Oak Ridge, then," Fields declared. "We know
nothing about that."

"Well, are you going to take the responsibility for it, or aren't you?"
Leighton insisted.

Lyons, who had been toying with a small metal paperweight, rapped on the
table with it.

"Gentlemen," he interrupted. "We're trying to cover too many subjects at
once. I suggest that we confine ourselves, at the beginning, to the
question of the dismissal of these men, Burris and Koffler. If we find
that the I.F.A.W. has a legitimate grievance in what we may call the
Burris-Koffler question, we can settle that and then go on to these
other questions."

"I'm agreeable to that," Melroy said.

"So are we," Cronnin nodded.

"All right, then. Since the I.F.A.W. is the complaining party in this
question, perhaps you gentlemen should state the grounds for your
complaints."

Fields and Cronnin exchanged glances: Cronnin nodded to Fields and the
latter rose. The two employees in question, he stated, had been the
victims of discrimination and persecution because of union activities.
Koffler was the union shop-steward for the men employed by the Melroy
Engineering Corporation, and Burris had been active in bringing
complaints about unfair employment practices. Furthermore, it was the
opinion of the I.F.A.W. that the psychological tests imposed on their
members had been a fraudulent pretext for dismissing these two men, and,
in any case, the practice of compelling workers to submit to such tests
was insulting, degrading, and not a customary condition of employment.

With that, he sat down. Melroy was on his feet at once.

"I'll deny those statements, categorically and seriatim," he replied.
"They are based entirely upon misrepresentations made by the two men who
were disqualified by the tests and dropped from my payroll because of
being, in the words of my contract with your union, 'persons of unsound
mind, deficient intelligence and/or emotional instability.' What
happened is that your local official, Crandall, accepted everything they
told him uncritically, and you accepted everything Crandall told you, in
the same spirit.

"Before I go on," Melroy continued, turning to Lyons, "have I your
permission to let Dr. Rives explain about these tests, herself, and tell
how they were given and evaluated?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Permission granted by Lyons, Doris Rives rose. At some length, she
explained the nature and purpose of the tests, and her method of scoring
and correlating them.

"Well, did Mr. Melroy suggest to you that any specific employee or
employees of his were undesirable and ought to be eliminated?" Fields
asked.

"Certainly not!" Doris Rives became angry. "And if he had, I'd have
taken the first plane out of here. That suggestion is insulting! And for
your information, I never met Mr. Melroy before day-before-yesterday
afternoon; I am not dependent upon him for anything; I took this job as
an accommodation to Dr. Karl von Heydenreich, who ordinarily does such
work for the Melroy company, and I'm losing money by remaining here.
Does that satisfy you?"

"Yes, it does," Fields admitted. He was obviously impressed by mention
of the distinguished Austrian psychologist's name. "If I may ask Mr.
Melroy a question: I gather that these tests are given to all your
employees. Why do you demand such an extraordinary level of intelligence
from your employees, even common laborers?"

"Extraordinary?" Melroy echoed. "If the standards established by those
tests are extraordinary, then God help this country; we are becoming a
race of morons! I'll leave that statement to Dr. Rives for confirmation;
she's already pointed out that all that is required to pass those tests
is ordinary adult mental capacity.

"My company specializes in cybernetic-control systems," he continued.
"In spite of a lot of misleading colloquial jargon about 'thinking
machines' and 'giant brains', a cybernetic system doesn't really think.
It only does what it's been designed _and built_ to do, and if somebody
builds a mistake into it, it will automatically and infallibly repeat
that mistake in practice."

"He's right," Cronnin said. "The men that build a machine like that have
got to be as smart as the machine's supposed to be, or the machine'll be
as dumb as they are."

Fields turned on him angrily. "Which side are you supposed to be on,
anyhow?" he demanded.

"You're probably a lawyer," Melroy said. "But I'll bet Mr. Cronnin's an
old reaction-plant man." Cronnin nodded unthinkingly in confirmation.
"All right, then. Ask him what those Doernberg-Giardanos are like. And
then let me ask you: Suppose some moron fixed up something that would go
wrong, or made the wrong kind of a mistake himself, around one of those
reactors?"

It was purely a rhetorical question, but, much later, when he would have
time to think about it, Scott Melroy was to wonder if ever in history
such a question had been answered so promptly and with such dramatic
calamitousness.

Three seconds after he stopped speaking, the lights went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment, they were silent and motionless. Then somebody across the
table from Melroy began to say, "What the devil--?" Doris Rives, beside
him, clutched his arm. At the head of the table, Lyons was fuming
impatiently, and Kenneth Leighton snapped a pocket-lighter and held it
up.

The Venetian-screened windows across the room faced east. In the flicker
of the lighter, Melroy made his way around to them and drew open the
slats of one, looking out. Except for the headlights of cars, far down
in the street, and the lights of ships in the harbor, the city was
completely blacked out. But there was one other, horrible, light far
away at the distant tip of Long Island--a huge ball of flame, floating
upward at the tip of a column of fiery gas. As he watched, there were
twinkles of unbearable brightness at the base of the pillar of fire,
spreading into awesome sheet-flashes, and other fireballs soared up.
Then the sound and the shock-wave of the first blast reached them.

"The main power-reactors, too," Melroy said to himself, not realizing
that he spoke audibly. "Too well shielded for the blast to get them, but
the heat melted the fissionables down to critical mass."

Leighton, the lighter still burning, was beside him, now.

"That's not--God, it can't be anything else! Why, the whole plant's
gone! There aren't enough other generators in this area to handle a
hundredth of the demand."

"And don't blame that on my alleged strike-breakers," Melroy warned.
"They hadn't got security-cleared to enter the reactor area when this
happened."

"What do you think happened?" Cronnin asked. "One of the
Doernberg-Giardanos let go?"

"Yes. Your man Crandall. If he survived that, it's his bad luck," Melroy
said grimly. "Last night, while Fred Hausinger was pulling the
fissionables and radioactives out of the Number One breeder, he found a
big nugget of Pu-239, about one-quarter CM. I don't know what was done
with it, but I do know that Crandall had the maintenance gang repack
that reactor, to keep my people from working on it. Nobody'll ever find
out just what happened, but they were in a hurry; they probably shoved
things in any old way. Somehow, that big subcritical nugget must have
got back in, and the breeding-cans, which were pretty ripe by that time,
must have been shoved in too close to it and to one another. You know
how fast those D-G's work. It just took this long to build up CM for a
bomb-type reaction. You remember what I was saying before the lights
went out? Well, it happened. Some moron--some untested and undetected
moron--made the wrong kind of a mistake."

"Too bad about Crandall. He was a good kid, only he didn't stop to think
often enough," Cronnin said. "Well, I guess the strike's off, now;
that's one thing."

"But all those people, out there!" Womanlike, Doris Rives was thinking
particularly rather than generally and of humans rather than
abstractions. "It must have killed everybody for miles around."

Sid Keating, Melroy thought. And Joe Ricci, and Ben Puryear, and Steve
Chalmers, and all the workmen whom he had brought here from Pittsburgh,
to their death. Then he stopped thinking about them. It didn't do any
good to think of men who'd been killed; he'd learned that years ago, as
a kid second lieutenant in Korea. The people to think about were the
millions in Greater New York, and up the Hudson Valley to Albany, and as
far south as Trenton, caught without light in the darkness, without heat
in the dead of winter, without power in subways and skyscrapers and on
railroads and interurban lines.

He turned to the woman beside him.

"Doris, before you could get your Board of Psychiatry and Neurology
diploma, you had to qualify as a regular M.D., didn't you?" he asked.

"Why, yes--"

"Then you'd better report to the nearest hospital. Any doctor at all is
going to be desperately needed, for the next day or so. Me, I still have
a reserve major's commission in the Army Corps of Engineers. They're
probably calling up reserve officers, with any radios that are still
working. Until I hear differently, I'm ordering myself on active duty as
of now." He looked around. "Anybody know where the nearest Army
headquarters is?"

"There's a recruiting station down on the thirty-something floor,"
Quillen said. "It's probably closed, now, though."

"Ground Defense Command; Midtown City," Leighton said. "They have a
medical section of their own; they'll be glad to get Dr. Rives, too."

Melroy helped her on with her coat and handed her her handbag, then
shrugged into his own overcoat and belted it about him, the weight of
the flashlight and the automatic sagging the pockets. He'd need both,
the gun as much as the light--New York had more than its share of
vicious criminals, to whom this power-failure would be a perfect
devilsend. Handing Doris the light, he let her take his left arm.
Together, they left the room and went down the hallway to the stairs and
the long walk to the darkened street below, into a city that had
suddenly been cut off from its very life-energy. A city that had put all
its eggs in one basket, and left the basket in the path of any
blundering foot.

_BOOKEND_




I still have the dollar bill. It's in my box at the bank, and I think
that's where it will stay. I simply won't destroy it, but I can think of
nobody to whom I'd be willing to show it--certainly nobody at the
college, my History Department colleagues least of all. Merely to tell
the story would brand me irredeemably as a crackpot, but crackpots are
tolerated, even on college faculties. It's only when they begin
producing physical evidence that they get themselves actively resented.

      *       *       *       *       *

When I went into the club-car for a nightcap before going back to my
compartment to turn in, there were five men there, sitting together.

One was an Army officer, with the insignia and badges of a Staff
Intelligence colonel. Next to him was a man of about my own age, with
sandy hair and a bony, Scottish looking face, who sat staring silently
into a highball which he held in both hands. Across the aisle, an
elderly man, who could have been a lawyer or a banker, was smoking a
cigar over a glass of port, and beside him sat a plump and slightly too
well groomed individual who had a tall colorless drink, probably
gin-and-tonic. The fifth man, separated from him by a vacant chair,
seemed to be dividing his attention between a book on his lap and the
conversation, in which he was taking no part. I sat down beside the
sandy-haired man; as I did so and rang for the waiter, the colonel was
saying:

"No, that wouldn't. I can think of a better one. Suppose you have
Columbus get his ships from Henry the Seventh of England and sail under
the English instead of the Spanish flag. You know, he did try to get
English backing, before he went to Spain, but King Henry turned him
down. That could be changed."

I pricked up my ears. The period from 1492 to the Revolution is my
special field of American history, and I knew, at once, the enormous
difference that would have made. It was a moment later that I realized
how oddly the colonel had expressed the idea, and by that time the plump
man was speaking.

"Yes, that would work," he agreed. "Those kings made decisions, most of
the time, on whether or not they had a hangover, or what some court
favorite thought." He got out a notebook and pen and scribbled briefly.
"I'll hand that to the planning staff when I get to New York. That's
Henry the Seventh, not Henry the Eighth? Right. We'll fix it so that
Columbus will catch him when he's in a good humor."

That was too much. I turned to the man beside me.

"What goes on?" I asked. "Has somebody invented a time machine?"

He looked up from the drink he was contemplating and gave me a grin.

"Sounds like it, doesn't it? Why, no; our friend here is getting up a
television program. Tell the gentleman about it," he urged the plump man
across the aisle.

The waiter arrived at that moment. The plump man, who seemed to need
little urging, waited until I had ordered a drink and then began telling
me what a positively sensational idea it was.

"We're calling it _Crossroads of Destiny_," he said. "It'll be a series,
one half-hour show a week; in each episode, we'll take some historic
event and show how history could have been changed if something had
happened differently. We dramatize the event up to that point just as it
really happened, and then a commentary-voice comes on and announces that
this is the Crossroads of Destiny; this is where history could have been
completely changed. Then he gives a resumé of what really did happen,
and then he says, '_But_--suppose so and so had done this and that,
instead of such and such.' Then we pick up the dramatization at that
point, only we show it the way it might have happened. Like this thing
about Columbus; we'll show how it could have happened, and end with
Columbus wading ashore with his sword in one hand and a flag in the
other, just like the painting, only it'll be the English flag, and
Columbus will shout: 'I take possession of this new land in the name of
His Majesty, Henry the Seventh of England!'" He brandished
his drink, to the visible consternation of the elderly man beside him.
"And then, the sailors all sing _God Save the King_."

"Which wasn't written till about 1745," I couldn't help mentioning.

"Huh?" The plump man looked startled. "Are you sure?" Then he decided
that I was, and shrugged. "Well, they can all shout, 'God Save King
Henry!' or 'St. George for England!' or something. Then, at the end, we
introduce the program guest, some history expert, a real name, and he
tells how he thinks history would have been changed if it had happened
this way."

The conservatively dressed gentleman beside him wanted to know how long
he expected to keep the show running.

"The crossroads will give out before long," he added.

"The sponsor'll give out first," I said. "History is just one damn
crossroads after another." I mentioned, in passing, that I taught the
subject. "Why, since the beginning of this century, we've had enough of
them to keep the show running for a year."

"We have about twenty already written and ready to produce," the plump
man said comfortably, "and ideas for twice as many that the planning
staff is working on now."

The elderly man accepted that and took another cautious sip of wine.

"What I wonder, though, is whether you can really say that history can
be changed."

"Well, of course--" The television man was taken aback; one always seems
to be when a basic assumption is questioned. "Of course, we only know
what really did happen, but it stands to reason if something had
happened differently, the results would have been different, doesn't
it?"

"But it seems to me that everything would work out the same in the long
run. There'd be some differences at the time, but over the years
wouldn't they all cancel out?"

"_Non, non, Monsieur!_" the man with the book, who had been outside the
conversation until now, told him earnestly. "Make no mistake; 'istoree
can be shange'!"

I looked at him curiously. The accent sounded French, but it wasn't
quite right. He was some kind of a foreigner, though; I'd swear that he
never bought the clothes he was wearing in this country. The way the
suit fitted, and the cut of it, and the shirt-collar, and the necktie.
The book he was reading was Langmuir's _Social History of the American
People_--not one of my favorites, a bit too much on the doctrinaire
side, but what a bookshop clerk would give a foreigner looking for
something to explain America.

"What do you think, Professor?" the plump man was asking me.

"It would work out the other way. The differences wouldn't cancel out;
they'd accumulate. Say something happened a century ago, to throw a
presidential election the other way. You'd get different people at the
head of the government, opposite lines of policy taken, and eventually
we'd be getting into different wars with different enemies at different
times, and different batches of young men killed before they could marry
and have families--different people being born or not being born. That
would mean different ideas, good or bad, being advanced; different books
written; different inventions, and different social and economic
problems as a consequence."

"Look, he's only giving himself a century," the colonel added. "Think of
the changes if this thing we were discussing, Columbus sailing under the
English flag, had happened. Or suppose Leif Ericson had been able to
plant a permanent colony in America in the Eleventh Century, or if the
Saracens had won the Battle of Tours. Try to imagine the world today if
any of those things had happened. One thing you can be sure of--any
errors you make in trying to imagine such a world will be on the side of
over-conservatism."

The sandy-haired man beside me, who had been using his highball for a
crystal ball, must have glimpsed in it what he was looking for. He
finished the drink, set the empty glass on the stand-tray beside him,
and reached back to push the button.

"I don't think you realize just how good an idea you have, here," he
told the plump man abruptly. "If you did, you wouldn't ruin it with such
timid and unimaginative treatment."

I thought he'd been staying out of the conversation because it was over
his head. Instead, he had been taking the plump man's idea apart,
examining all the pieces, and considering what was wrong with it and how
it could be improved. The plump man looked startled, and then
angry--timid and unimaginative were the last things he'd expected his
idea to be called. Then he became uneasy. Maybe this fellow was a
typical representative of his lord and master, the faceless abstraction
called the Public.

"What do you mean?" he asked.

"Misplaced emphasis. You shouldn't emphasize the event that could have
changed history; you should emphasize the changes that could have been
made. You're going to end this show you were talking about with a shot
of Columbus wading up to the beach with an English flag, aren't you?"

"Well, that's the logical ending."

"That's the logical beginning," the sandy-haired man contradicted. "And
after that, your guest historian comes on; how much time will he be
allowed?"

"Well, maybe three or four minutes. We can't cut the dramatization too
short--"

"And he'll have to explain, a couple of times, and in words of one
syllable, that what we have seen didn't really happen, because if he
doesn't, the next morning half the twelve-year-old kids in the country
will be rushing wild-eyed into school to slip the teacher the real
inside about the discovery of America. By the time he gets that done,
he'll be able to mumble a couple of generalities about vast and
incalculable effects, and then it'll be time to tell the public about
Widgets, the really safe cigarettes, all filter and absolutely free from
tobacco."

The waiter arrived at this point, and the sandy-haired man ordered
another rye highball. I decided to have another bourbon on the rocks,
and the TV impresario said, "Gin-and-tonic," absently, and went into a
reverie which lasted until the drinks arrived. Then he came awake again.

"I see what you mean," he said. "Most of the audience would wonder what
difference it would have made where Columbus would have gotten his
ships, as long as he got them and America got discovered. I can see it
would have made a hell of a big difference. But how could it be handled
any other way? How could you figure out just what the difference would
have been?"

"Well, you need a man who'd know the historical background, and you'd
need a man with a powerful creative imagination, who is used to using it
inside rigorously defined limits. Don't try to get them both in one; a
collaboration would really be better. Then you work from the known
situation in Europe and in America in 1492, and decide on the immediate
effects. And from that, you have to carry it along, step by step, down
to the present. It would be a lot of hard and very exacting work, but
the result would be worth it." He took a sip from his glass and added:
"Remember, you don't have to prove that the world today would be the way
you set it up. All you have to do is make sure that nobody else would be
able to prove that it wouldn't."

"Well, how could you present that?"

"As a play, with fictional characters and a plot; time, the present,
under the changed conditions. The plot--the reason the coward conquers
his fear and becomes a hero, the obstacle to the boy marrying the girl,
the reason the innocent man is being persecuted--will have to grow out
of this imaginary world you've constructed, and be impossible in our
real world. As long as you stick to that, you're all right."

"Sure. I get that." The plump man was excited again; he was about half
sold on the idea. "But how will we get the audience to accept it? We're
asking them to start with an assumption they know isn't true."

"Maybe it is, in another time-dimension," the colonel suggested. "You
can't prove it isn't. For that matter, you can't prove there aren't
other time-dimensions."

"Hah, that's it!" the sandy-haired man exclaimed. "World of alternate
probability. That takes care of that."

He drank about a third of his highball and sat gazing into the rest of
it, in an almost yogic trance. The plump man looked at the colonel in
bafflement.

"Maybe this alternate-probability time-dimension stuff means something
to you," he said. "Be damned if it does to me."

"Well, as far as we know, we live in a four-dimensional universe," the
colonel started.

The elderly man across from him groaned. "Fourth dimension! Good God,
are we going to talk about that?"

"It isn't anything to be scared of. You carry an instrument for
measuring in the fourth dimension all the time. A watch."

"You mean it's just time? But that isn't--"

"We know of three dimensions of space," the colonel told him, gesturing
to indicate them. "We can use them for coordinates to locate things, but
we also locate things in time. I wouldn't like to ride on a train or a
plane if we didn't. Well, let's call the time we know, the time your
watch registers, Time-A. Now, suppose the entire, infinite extent of
Time-A is only an instant in another dimension of time, which we'll call
Time-B. The next instant of Time-B is also the entire extent of Time-A,
and the next and the next. As in Time-A, different things are happening
at different instants. In one of these instants of Time-B, one of the
things that's happening is that King Henry the Seventh of England is
furnishing ships to Christopher Columbus."

The man with the odd clothes was getting excited again.

"Zees--'ow you say--zees alternate probabeelitay; eet ees a theory
zhenerally accept' een zees countree?"

"Got it!" the sandy-haired man said, before anybody could answer. He set
his drink on the stand-tray and took a big jackknife out of his pocket,
holding it unopened in his hand. "How's this sound?" he asked, and hit
the edge of the tray with the back of the knife, _Bong_!

"Crossroads--of--_Destiny_!" he intoned, and hit the edge of the tray
again, _Bong_! "This is the year 1959--but not the 1959 of our world,
for we are in a world of alternate probability, in another dimension of
time; a world parallel to and coexistent with but separate from our own,
in which history has been completely altered by a single momentous
event." He shifted back to his normal voice.

"Not bad; only twenty-five seconds," the plump man said, looking up from
his wrist watch. "And a trained announcer could maybe shave five seconds
off that. Yes, something like that, and at the end we'll have another
thirty seconds, and we can do without the guest."

"But zees alternate probibeelitay, in anozzer dimension," the stranger
was insisting. "Ees zees a concept original weet you?" he asked the
colonel.

"Oh, no; that idea's been around for a long time."

"I never heard of it before now," the elderly man said, as though that
completely demolished it.

"Zen eet ees zhenerally accept' by zee scienteest'?"

"Umm, no," the sandy-haired man relieved the colonel. "There's
absolutely no evidence to support it, and scientists don't accept
unsupported assumptions unless they need them to explain something, and
they don't need this assumption for anything. Well, it would come in
handy to make some of these reports of freak phenomena, like mysterious
appearances and disappearances, or flying-object sightings, or reported
falls of non-meteoric matter, theoretically respectable. Reports like
that usually get the ignore-and-forget treatment, now."

"Zen you believe zat zeese ozzer world of zee alternate probabeelitay,
zey exist?"

"No. I don't disbelieve it, either. I've no reason to, one way or
another." He studied his drink for a moment, and lowered the level in
the glass slightly. "I've said that once in a while things get reported
that look as though such other worlds, in another time-dimension, may
exist. There have been whole books published by people who collect
stories like that. I must say that academic science isn't very
hospitable to them."

"You mean, zings sometimes, 'ow-you-say, leak in from one of zees ozzer
worlds? Zat has been known to 'appen?"

"Things have been said to have happened that might, if true, be cases of
things leaking through from another time world," the sandy-haired man
corrected. "Or leaking away to another time world." He mentioned a few
of the more famous cases of unexplained mysteries--the English diplomat
in Prussia who vanished in plain sight of a number of people, the ship
found completely deserted by her crew, the lifeboats all in place;
stories like that. "And there's this rash of alleged sightings of
unidentified flying objects. I'd sooner believe that they came from
another dimension than from another planet. But, as far as I know,
nobody's seriously advanced this other-time-dimension theory to explain
them."

"I think the idea's familiar enough, though, that we can use it as an
explanation, or pseudo-explanation, for the program," the television man
said. "Fact is, we aren't married to this Crossroads title, yet; we
could just as easily all it _Fifth Dimension_. That would lead the
public, to expect something out of the normal before the show started."

      *       *       *       *       *

That got the conversation back onto the show, and we talked for some
time about it, each of us suggesting possibilities. The stranger even
suggested one--that the Civil War had started during the Jackson
Administration. Fortunately, nobody else noticed that. Finally, a porter
came through and inquired if any of us were getting off at Harrisburg,
saying that we would be getting in in five minutes.

The stranger finished his drink hastily and got up, saying that he would
have to get his luggage. He told us how much he had enjoyed the
conversation, and then followed the porter toward the rear of the train.
After he had gone out, the TV man chuckled.

"Was that one an oddball!" he exclaimed. "Where the hell do you suppose
he got that suit?"

"It was a tailored suit," the colonel said. "A very good one. And I
can't think of any country in the world in which they cut suits just
like that. And did you catch his accent?"

"Phony," the television man pronounced. "The French accent of a Greek
waiter in a fake French restaurant. In the Bronx."

"Not quite. The pronunciation was all right for French accent, but the
cadence, the way the word-sounds were strung together, was German."

The elderly man looked at the colonel keenly. "I see you're
Intelligence," he mentioned. "Think he might be somebody up your alley,
Colonel?"

The colonel shook his head. "I doubt it. There are agents of unfriendly
powers in this country--a lot of them, I'm sorry to have to say. But
they don't speak accented English, and they don't dress eccentrically.
You know there's an enemy agent in a crowd, pick out the most normally
American type in sight and you usually won't have to look further."

The train ground to a stop. A young couple with hand-luggage came in and
sat at one end of the car, waiting until other accommodations could be
found for them. After a while, it started again. I dallied over my
drink, and then got up and excused myself, saying that I wanted to turn
in early.

In the next car behind, I met the porter who had come in just before the
stop. He looked worried, and after a moment's hesitation, he spoke to
me.

"Pardon, sir. The man in the club-car who got off at Harrisburg; did you
know him?"

"Never saw him before. Why?"

"He tipped me with a dollar bill when he got off. Later, I looked
closely at it. I do not like it."

He showed it to me, and I didn't blame him. It was marked _One Dollar_,
and _United States of America_, but outside that there wasn't a thing
right about it. One side was gray, all right, but the other side was
green. The picture wasn't the right one. And there were a lot of other
things about it, some of them absolutely ludicrous. It wasn't
counterfeit--it wasn't even an imitation of a United States bill.

And then it hit me, like a bullet in the chest. Not a bill of _our_
United States. No wonder he had been so interested in whether our
scientists accepted the theory of other time dimensions and other worlds
of alternate probability!

On an impulse, I got out two ones and gave them to the porter--perfectly
good United States Bank gold-certificates.

"You'd better let me keep this," I said, trying to make it sound the way
he'd think a Federal Agent would say it. He took the bills, smiling, and
I folded his bill and put it into my vest pocket.

"Thank you, sir," he said. "I have no wish to keep it."

Some part of my mind below the level of consciousness must have taken
over and guided me back to the right car and compartment; I didn't
realize where I was going till I put on the light and recognized my own
luggage. Then I sat down, as dizzy as though the two drinks I had had,
had been a dozen. For a moment, I was tempted to rush back to the
club-car and show the thing to the colonel and the sandy-haired man. On
second thought, I decided against that.

The next thing I banished from my mind was the adjective "incredible." I
had to credit it; I had the proof in my vest pocket. The coincidence
arising from our topic of conversation didn't bother me too much,
either. It was the topic which had drawn him into it. And, as the
sandy-haired man had pointed out, we know nothing, one way or another,
about these other worlds; we certainly don't know what barriers separate
them from our own, or how often those barriers may fail. I might have
thought more about that if I'd been in physical science. I wasn't; I was
in American history. So what I thought about was what sort of country
that other United States must be, and what its history must have been.

The man's costume was basically the same as ours--same general style,
but many little differences of fashion. I had the impression that it was
the costume of a less formal and conservative society than ours and a
more casual way of life. It could be the sort of costume into which ours
would evolve in another thirty or so years. There was another odd thing.
I'd noticed him looking curiously at both the waiter and the porter, as
though something about them surprised him. The only thing they had in
common was their race, the same as every other passenger-car attendant.
But he wasn't used to seeing Chinese working in railway cars.

And there had been that remark about the Civil War and the Jackson
Administration. I wondered what Jackson he had been talking about; not
Andrew Jackson, the Tennessee militia general who got us into war with
Spain in 1810, I hoped. And the Civil War; that had baffled me
completely. I wondered if it had been a class-war, or a sectional
conflict. We'd had plenty of the latter, during our first century, but
all of them had been settled peacefully and Constitutionally. Well, some
of the things he'd read in Lingmuir's _Social History_ would be
surprises for him, too.

And then I took the bill out for another examination. It must have
gotten mixed with his spendable money--it was about the size of
ours--and I wondered how he had acquired enough of our money to pay his
train fare. Maybe he'd had a diamond and sold it, or maybe he'd had a
gun and held somebody up. If he had, I didn't know that I blamed him,
under the circumstances. I had an idea that he had some realization of
what had happened to him--the book, and the fake accent, to cover any
mistakes he might make. Well, I wished him luck, and then I unfolded the
dollar bill and looked at it again.

In the first place, it had been issued by the United States Department
of Treasury itself, not the United States Bank or one of the State
Banks. I'd have to think over the implications of that carefully. In the
second place, it was a silver certificate; why, in this other United
States, silver must be an acceptable monetary metal; maybe equally so
with gold, though I could hardly believe that. Then I looked at the
picture on the gray obverse side, and had to strain my eyes on the fine
print under it to identify it. It was Washington, all right, but a much
older Washington than any of the pictures of him I had ever seen. Then I
realized that I knew just where the Crossroads of Destiny for his world
and mine had been.

As every schoolchild among us knows, General George Washington was shot
dead at the Battle of Germantown, in 1777, by an English, or, rather,
Scottish, officer, Patrick Ferguson--the same Patrick Ferguson who
invented the breech-loading rifle that smashed Napoleon's armies.
Washington, today, is one of our lesser national heroes, because he was
our first military commander-in-chief. But in this other world, he must
have survived to lead our armies to victory and become our first
President, as was the case with the man who took his place when he was
killed.

I folded the bill and put it away carefully among my identification
cards, where it wouldn't a second time get mixed with the money I spent,
and as I did, I wondered what sort of a President George Washington had
made, and what part, in the history of that other United States, had
been played by the man whose picture appears on our dollar
bills--General and President Benedict Arnold.

_BOOKEND_


For a moment, after the screen door snapped and wakened him, Lee
Richardson sat breathless and motionless, his eyes still closed, trying
desperately to cling to the dream and print it upon his conscious memory
before it faded.

"Are you there, Lee?" he heard Alexis Pitov's voice.

"Yes, I'm here. What time is it?" he asked, and then added, "I fell
asleep. I was dreaming."

It was all right; he was going to be able to remember. He could still
see the slim woman with the graying blonde hair, playing with the little
dachshund among the new-fallen leaves on the lawn. He was glad they'd
both been in this dream together; these dream-glimpses were all he'd had
for the last fifteen years, and they were too precious to lose. He
opened his eyes. The Russian was sitting just outside the light from the
open door of the bungalow, lighting a cigarette. For a moment, he could
see the blocky, high-cheeked face, now pouched and wrinkled, and then
the flame went out and there was only the red coal glowing in the
darkness. He closed his eyes again, and the dream picture came back to
him, the woman catching the little dog and raising her head as though to
speak to him.

"Plenty of time, yet." Pitov was speaking German instead of Spanish, as
they always did between themselves. "They're still counting down from
minus three hours. I just phoned the launching site for a jeep.
Eugenio's been there ever since dinner; they say he's running around
like a cat looking for a place to have her first litter of kittens."

He chuckled. This would be something new for Eugenio Galvez--for which
he could be thankful.

"I hope the generators don't develop any last-second bugs," he said.
"We'll only be a mile and a half away, and that'll be too close to fifty
kilos of negamatter if the field collapses."

"It'll be all right," Pitov assured him. "The bugs have all been chased
out years ago."

"Not out of those generators in the rocket. They're new." He fumbled in
his coat pocket for his pipe and tobacco. "I never thought I'd run
another nuclear-bomb test, as long as I lived."

"Lee!" Pitov was shocked. "You mustn't call it that. It isn't that, at
all. It's purely a scientific experiment."

"Wasn't that all any of them were? We made lots of experiments like
this, back before 1969." The memories of all those other tests, each
ending in an Everest-high mushroom column, rose in his mind. And the end
result--the United States and the Soviet Union blasted to rubble, a
whole hemisphere pushed back into the Dark Ages, a quarter of a billion
dead. Including a slim woman with graying blonde hair, and a little red
dog, and a girl from Odessa whom Alexis Pitov had been going to marry.
"Forgive me, Alexis. I just couldn't help remembering. I suppose it's
this shot we're going to make, tonight. It's so much like the other
ones, before--" He hesitated slightly. "Before the Auburn Bomb."

There; he'd come out and said it. In all the years they'd worked
together at the _Instituto Argentino de Ciencia Fisica_, that had been
unmentioned between them. The families of hanged cutthroats avoid
mention of ropes and knives. He thumbed the old-fashioned American
lighter and held it to his pipe. Across the veranda, in the darkness, he
knew that Pitov was looking intently at him.

"You've been thinking about that, lately, haven't you?" the Russian
asked, and then, timidly: "Was that what you were dreaming of?"

"Oh, no, thank heaven!"

"I think about it, too, always. I suppose--" He seemed relieved, now
that it had been brought out into the open and could be discussed. "You
saw it fall, didn't you?"

"That's right. From about thirty miles away. A little closer than we'll
be to this shot, tonight. I was in charge of the investigation at
Auburn, until we had New York and Washington and Detroit and Mobile and
San Francisco to worry about. Then what had happened to Auburn wasn't
important, any more. We were trying to get evidence to lay before the
United Nations. We kept at it for about twelve hours after the United
Nations had ceased to exist."

"I could never understand about that, Lee. I don't know what the truth
is; I probably never shall. But I know that my government did not launch
that missile. During the first days after yours began coming in, I
talked to people who had been in the Kremlin at the time. One had been
in the presence of Klyzenko himself when the news of your bombardment
arrived. He said that Klyzenko was absolutely stunned. We always
believed that your government decided upon a preventive surprise attack,
and picked out a town, Auburn, New York, that had been hit by one of our
first retaliation missiles, and claimed that it had been hit first."

He shook his head. "Auburn was hit an hour before the first American
missile was launched. I know that to be a fact. We could never
understand why you launched just that one, and no more until after ours
began landing on you; why you threw away the advantage of surprise and
priority of attack--"

"Because we didn't do it, Lee!" The Russian's voice trembled with
earnestness. "You believe me when I tell you that?"

"Yes, I believe you. After all that happened, and all that you, and I,
and the people you worked with, and the people I worked with, and your
government, and mine, have been guilty of, it would be a waste of breath
for either of us to try to lie to the other about what happened fifteen
years ago." He drew slowly on his pipe. "But who launched it, then? It
had to be launched by somebody."

"Don't you think I've been tormenting myself with that question for the
last fifteen years?" Pitov demanded. "You know, there were people inside
the Soviet Union--not many, and they kept themselves well hidden--who
were dedicated to the overthrow of the Soviet regime. They, or some of
them, might have thought that the devastation of both our countries, and
the obliteration of civilization in the Northern Hemisphere, would be a
cheap price to pay for ending the rule of the Communist Party."

"Could they have built an ICBM with a thermonuclear warhead in secret?"
he asked. "There were also fanatical nationalist groups in Europe, both
sides of the Iron Curtain, who might have thought our mutual destruction
would be worth the risks involved."

"There was China, and India. If your country and mine wiped each other
out, they could go back to the old ways and the old traditions. Or
Japan, or the Moslem States. In the end, they all went down along with
us, but what criminal ever expects to fall?"

"We have too many suspects, and the trail's too cold, Alexis. That
rocket wouldn't have had to have been launched anywhere in the Northern
Hemisphere. For instance, our friends here in the Argentine have been
doing very well by themselves since _El Coloso del Norte_ went down."

And there were the Australians, picking themselves up bargains in
real-estate in the East Indies at gun-point, and there were the Boers,
trekking north again, in tanks instead of ox-wagons. And Brazil, with a
not-too-implausible pretender to the Braganza throne, calling itself the
Portuguese Empire and looking eastward. And, to complete the picture,
here were Professor Doctor Lee Richardson and Comrade Professor Alexis
Petrovitch Pitov, getting ready to test a missile with a
matter-annihilation warhead.

No. This thing just wasn't a weapon.

A jeep came around the corner, lighting the dark roadway between the
bungalows, its radio on and counting down--_Twenty two minutes. Twenty
one fifty nine, fifty eight, fifty seven_--It came to a stop in front of
their bungalow, at exactly Minus Two Hours, Twenty One Minutes, Fifty
Four Seconds. The driver called out in Spanish:

"Doctor Richardson; Doctor Pitov! Are you ready?"

"Yes, ready. We're coming."

They both got to their feet, Richardson pulling himself up reluctantly.
The older you get, the harder it is to leave a comfortable chair. He
settled himself beside his colleague and former enemy, and the jeep
started again, rolling between the buildings of the living-quarters area
and out onto the long, straight road across the pampas toward the
distant blaze of electric lights.

He wondered why he had been thinking so much, lately, about the Auburn
Bomb. He'd questioned, at times, indignantly, of course, whether Russia
had launched it--but it wasn't until tonight, until he had heard what
Pitov had had to say, that he seriously doubted it. Pitov wouldn't lie
about it, and Pitov would have been in a position to have known the
truth, if the missile had been launched from Russia. Then he stopped
thinking about what was water--or blood--a long time over the dam.

The special policeman at the entrance to the launching site reminded
them that they were both smoking; when they extinguished, respectively,
their cigarette and pipe, he waved the jeep on and went back to his
argument with a carload of tourists who wanted to get a good view of the
launching.

"There, now, Lee; do you need anything else to convince you that this
isn't a weapon project?" Pitov asked.

"No, now that you mention it. I don't. You know, I don't believe I've
had to show an identity card the whole time I've been here."

"I don't believe I have an identity card," Pitov said. "Think of that."

The lights blazed everywhere around them, but mostly about the rocket
that towered above everything else, so thick that it seemed squat. The
gantry-cranes had been hauled away, now, and it stood alone, but it was
still wreathed in thick electric cables. They were pouring enough
current into that thing to light half the street-lights in Buenos Aires;
when the cables were blown free by separation charges at the blastoff,
the generators powered by the rocket-engines had better be able to take
over, because if the magnetic field collapsed and that fifty-kilo chunk
of negative-proton matter came in contact with natural positive-proton
matter, an old-fashioned H-bomb would be a firecracker to what would
happen. Just one hundred kilos of pure, two-hundred proof MC2.

The driver took them around the rocket, dodging assorted trucks and
mobile machinery that were being hurried out of the way. The countdown
was just beyond two hours five minutes. The jeep stopped at the edge of
a crowd around three more trucks, and Doctor Eugenio Galvez, the
director of the Institute, left the crowd and approached at an awkward
half-run as they got down.

"Is everything checked, gentlemen?" he wanted to know.

"It was this afternoon at 1730," Pitov told him. "And nobody's been
burning my telephone to report anything different. Are the balloons and
the drone planes ready?"

"The Air Force just finished checking; they're ready. Captain Urquiola
flew one of the planes over the course and made a guidance-tape; that's
been duplicated and all the planes are equipped with copies."

"How's the wind?" Richardson asked.

"Still steady. We won't have any trouble about fallout or with the
balloons."

"Then we'd better go back to the bunker and make sure everybody there is
on the job."

The loudspeaker was counting down to Two Hours One Minute.

"Could you spare a few minutes to talk to the press?" Eugenio Galvez
asked. "And perhaps say a few words for telecast? This last is most
important; we can't explain too many times the purpose of this
experiment. There is still much hostility, arising from fear that we are
testing a nuclear weapon."

The press and telecast services were well represented; there were close
to a hundred correspondents, from all over South America, from South
Africa and Australia, even one from Ceylon. They had three trucks, with
mobile telecast pickups, and when they saw who was approaching, they
released the two rocketry experts they had been quizzing and pounced on
the new victims.

Was there any possibility that negative-proton matter might be used as a
weapon?

"Anything can be used as a weapon; you could stab a man to death with
that lead pencil you're using," Pitov replied. "But I doubt if
negamatter will ever be so used. We're certainly not working on weapons
design here. We started, six years ago, with the ability to produce
negative protons, reverse-spin neutrons, and positrons, and the
theoretical possibility of assembling them into negamatter. We have just
gotten a fifty kilogramme mass of nega-iron assembled. In those six
years, we had to invent all our techniques, and design all our
equipment. If we'd been insane enough to want to build a nuclear weapon,
after what we went through up North, we could have done so from memory,
and designed a better--which is to say a worse--one from memory in a few
days."

"Yes, and building a negamatter bomb for military purposes would be like
digging a fifty foot shaft to get a rock to bash somebody's head in,
when you could do the job better with the shovel you're digging with,"
Richardson added. "The time, money, energy and work we put in on this
thing would be ample to construct twenty thermonuclear bombs. And that's
only a small part of it." He went on to tell them about the magnetic
bottle inside the rocket's warhead, mentioning how much electric current
was needed to keep up the magnetic field that insulated the negamatter
from contact with posimatter.

"Then what was the purpose of this experiment, Doctor Richardson?"

"Oh, we were just trying to find out a few basic facts about natural
structure. Long ago, it was realized that the nucleonic
particles--protons, neutrons, mesons and so on--must have structure of
their own. Since we started constructing negative-proton matter, we've
found out a few things about nucleonic structure. Some rather odd
things, including fractions of Planck's constant."

A couple of the correspondents--a man from La Prensa, and an
Australian--whistled softly. The others looked blank. Pitov took over:

"You see, gentlemen, most of what we learned, we learned from putting
negamatter atoms together. We annihilated a few of them--over there in
that little concrete building, we have one of the most massive steel
vaults in the world, where we do that--but we assembled millions of them
for every one we annihilated, and that chunk of nega-iron inside the
magnetic bottle kept growing. And when you have a piece of negamatter
you don't want, you can't just throw it out on the scrap-pile. We might
have rocketed it into escape velocity and let it blow up in space, away
from the Moon or any of the artificial satellites, but why waste it? So
we're going to have the rocket eject it, and when it falls, we can see,
by our telemetered instruments, just what happens."

"Well, won't it be annihilated by contact with atmosphere?" somebody
asked.

"That's one of the things we want to find out," Pitov said. "We estimate
about twenty percent loss from contact with atmosphere, but the mass
that actually lands on the target area should be about forty kilos. It
should be something of a spectacle, coming down."

"You say you had to assemble it, after creating the negative protons and
neutrons and the positrons. Doesn't any of this sort of matter exist in
nature?"

The man who asked that knew better himself. He just wanted the answer on
the record.

"Oh no; not on this planet, and probably not in the Galaxy. There may be
whole galaxies composed of nothing but negamatter. There may even be
isolated stars and planetary systems inside our Galaxy composed of
negamatter, though I think that very improbable. But when negamatter and
posimatter come into contact with one another, the result is immediate
mutual annihilation."

They managed to get away from the press, and returned as far as the
bunkers, a mile and a half away. Before they went inside, Richardson
glanced up at the sky, fixing the location of a few of the more
conspicuous stars in his mind. There were almost a hundred men and women
inside, each at his or her instruments--view-screens, radar indicators,
detection instruments of a dozen kinds. The reporters and telecast
people arrived shortly afterward, and Eugenio Galvez took them in tow.
While Richardson and Pitov were making their last-minute rounds, the
countdown progressed past minus one hour, and at minus twenty minutes
all the overhead lights went off and the small instrument operators'
lights came on.

Pitov turned on a couple of view-screens, one from a pickup on the roof
of the bunker and another from the launching-pad. They sat down side by
side and waited. Richardson got his pipe out and began loading it. The
loudspeaker was saying: "_Minus two minutes, one fifty nine, fifty
eight, fifty seven_--"

He let his mind drift away from the test, back to the world that had
been smashed around his ears in the autumn of 1969. He was doing that so
often, now, when he should be thinking about--

"_Two seconds, one second_. FIRING!"

It was a second later that his eyes focussed on the left hand
view-screen. Red and yellow flames were gushing out at the bottom of the
rocket, and it was beginning to tremble. Then the upper jets, the ones
that furnished power for the generators, began firing. He looked
anxiously at the meters; the generators were building up power. Finally,
when he was sure that the rocket would be blasting off anyhow, the
separator-charges fired and the heavy cables fell away. An instant
later, the big missile started inching upward, gaining speed by the
second, first slowly and jerkily and then more rapidly, until it passed
out of the field of the pickup. He watched the rising spout of fire from
the other screen until it passed from sight.

By that time, Pitov had twisted a dial and gotten another view on the
left hand screen, this time from close to the target. That camera was
radar-controlled; it had fastened onto the approaching missile, which
was still invisible. The stars swung slowly across the screen until
Richardson recognized the ones he had spotted at the zenith. In a
moment, now, the rocket, a hundred miles overhead, would be nosing down,
and then the warhead would open and the magnetic field inside would
alter and the mass of negamatter would be ejected.

The stars were blotted out by a sudden glow of light. Even at a hundred
miles, there was enough atmospheric density to produce considerable
energy release. Pitov, beside him, was muttering, partly in German and
partly in Russian; most of what Richardson caught was figures. Trying to
calculate how much of the mass of unnatural iron would get down for the
ground blast. Then the right hand screen broke into a wriggling orgy of
color, and at the same time every scrap of radio-transmitted apparatus
either went out or began reporting erratically. The left hand screen,
connected by wiring to the pickup on the roof, was still functioning.
For a moment, Richardson wondered what was going on, and then shocked
recognition drove that from his mind as he stared at the
ever-brightening glare in the sky.

It was the Auburn Bomb again! He was back, in memory, to the night on
the shore of Lake Ontario; the party breaking up in the early hours of
morning; he and Janet and the people with whom they had been spending a
vacation week standing on the lawn as the guests were getting into their
cars. And then the sudden light in the sky. The cries of surprise, and
then of alarm as it seemed to be rushing straight down upon them. He and
Janet, clutching each other and staring up in terror at the falling
blaze from which there seemed no escape. Then relief, as it curved away
from them and fell to the south. And then the explosion, lighting the
whole southern sky.

There was a similar explosion in the screen, when the mass of nega-iron
landed--a sheet of pure white light, so bright and so quick as to almost
pass above the limit of visibility, and then a moment's darkness that
was in his stunned eyes more than in the screen, and then the rising
glow of updrawn incandescent dust.

Before the sound-waves had reached them, he had been legging it into the
house. The television had been on, and it had been acting as insanely as
the screen on his right now. He had called the State Police--the
telephones had been working all right--and told them who he was, and
they had told him to stay put and they'd send a car for him. They did,
within minutes. Janet and his host and hostess had waited with him on
the lawn until it came, and after he had gotten into it, he had turned
around and looked back through the rear window, and seen Janet standing
under the front light, holding the little dog in her arms, flopping one
of its silly little paws up and down with her hand to wave goodbye to
him.

He had seen her and the dog like that every day of his life for the last
fifteen years.

"What kind of radiation are you getting?" he could hear Alexis Pitov
asking into a phone. "What? Nothing else? Oh; yes, of course. But mostly
cosmic. That shouldn't last long." He turned from the phone. "A devil's
own dose of cosmic, and some gamma. It was the cosmic radiation that put
the radios and telescreens out. That's why I insisted that the drone
planes be independent of radio control."

They always got cosmic radiation from the micro-annihilations in the
test-vault. Well, now they had an idea of what produced natural cosmic
rays. There must be quite a bit of negamatter and posimatter going into
mutual annihilation and total energy release through the Universe.

"Of course, there were no detectors set up in advance around Auburn," he
said. "We didn't really begin to find anything out for half an hour. By
that time, the cosmic radiation was over and we weren't getting anything
but gamma."

"What--What has Auburn to do--?" The Russian stopped short. "You think
this was the same thing?" He gave it a moment's consideration. "Lee,
you're crazy! There wasn't an atom of artificial negamatter in the world
in 1969. Nobody had made any before us. We gave each other some
scientific surprises, then, but nobody surprised both of us. You and I,
between us, knew everything that was going on in nuclear physics in the
world. And you know as well as I do--"

A voice came out of the public-address speaker. "Some of the radio
equipment around the target area, that wasn't knocked out by blast, is
beginning to function again. There is an increasingly heavy gamma
radiation, but no more cosmic rays. They were all prompt radiation from
the annihilation; the gamma is secondary effect. Wait a moment; Captain
Urquiola, of the Air Force, says that the first drone plane is about to
take off."

It had been two hours after the blast that the first drones had gone
over what had been Auburn, New York. He was trying to remember, as
exactly as possible, what had been learned from them. Gamma radiation; a
great deal of gamma. But it didn't last long. It had been almost down to
a safe level by the time the investigation had been called off, and, two
months after there had been no more missiles, and no way of producing
more, and no targets to send them against if they'd had them, rather--he
had been back at Auburn on his hopeless quest, and there had been almost
no trace of radiation. Nothing but a wide, shallow crater, almost two
hundred feet in diameter and only fifteen at its deepest, already full
of water, and a circle of flattened and scattered rubble for a mile and
a half all around it. He was willing to bet anything that that was what
they'd find where the chunk of nega-iron had landed, fifty miles away on
the pampas.

Well, the first drone ought to be over the target area before long, and
at least one of the balloons that had been sent up was reporting its
course by radio. The radios in the others were silent, and the recording
counters had probably jammed in all of them. There'd be something of
interest when the first drone came back. He dragged his mind back to the
present, and went to work with Alexis Pitov.

They were at it all night, checking, evaluating, making sure that the
masses of data that were coming in were being promptly processed for
programming the computers. At each of the increasingly frequent
coffee-breaks, he noticed Pitov looking curiously. He said nothing,
however, until, long after dawn, they stood outside the bunker, waiting
for the jeep that would take them back to their bungalow and watching
the line of trucks--Argentine army engineers, locally hired laborers,
load after load of prefab-huts and equipment--going down toward the
target-area, where they would be working for the next week.

"Lee, were you serious?" Pitov asked. "I mean, about this being like the
one at Auburn?"

"It was exactly like Auburn; even that blazing light that came rushing
down out of the sky. I wondered about that at the time--what kind of a
missile would produce an effect like that. Now I know. We just launched
one like it."

"But that's impossible! I told you, between us we know everything that
was happening in nuclear physics then. Nobody in the world knew how to
assemble atoms of negamatter and build them into masses."

"Nobody, and nothing, on this planet built that mass of negamatter. I
doubt if it even came from this Galaxy. But we didn't know that, then.
When that negamatter meteor fell, the only thing anybody could think of
was that it had been a Soviet missile. If it had hit around Leningrad or
Moscow or Kharkov, who would you have blamed it on?"

_BOOKEND_

